<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Book IX</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="book-9" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Book</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IX</span>
				</h2>
				<blockquote epub:type="epigraph z3998:verse">
					<p>
						<span>Conscience!⁠ ⁠…</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Poor plodding Priests and preaching Friars may make</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Their hollow pulpits and the empty aisles</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of churches ring with that round word: but we,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That draw the subtile and more piercing air</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In that sublimed region of a court,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Know all is good we make so, and go on</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Secured by the prosperity of our crimes.</span>
					</p>
					<cite>Ben Jonson, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Mortimer His Fall</i></cite>
				</blockquote>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span>“Go up, my Sister Maimuna,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Go up, and read the stars!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Lo! on the terrace of the topmost tower</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She stands; her darkening eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her fine face raised to heaven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her white hair flowing like the silver streams</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That streak the northern night.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>They hear her coming tread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They lift their asking eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her face is serious, her unwilling lips</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slow to the tale of ill.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“What hast thou read? what hast thou read?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quoth Khawla in alarm.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Danger⁠ ⁠… death⁠ ⁠… judgement!” Maimuna replied.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Is that the language of the lights of Heaven?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Exclaimed the sterner Witch.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Creatures of Allah, they perform his will.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“And with their lying menaces would daunt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Our credulous folly.⁠ ⁠… Maimuna,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I never liked this uncongenial lore!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Better befits to make the sacrifice</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Of Divination; so shall I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Be mine own Oracle.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Command the victims thou, O King!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Male and female they must be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Thou knowest the needful rites.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Meanwhile I purify the place.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The Sultan went; the Sorceress rose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And North and South and East and West</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She faced the points of Heaven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And ever where she turned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She laid her hand upon the wall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And up she looked and smote the air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And down she stooped and smote the floor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“To Eblis and his servants</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I consecrate the place,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Let none intrude but they!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Whatever hath the breath of life,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Whatever hath the sap of life,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Let it be blasted and die!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Now all is prepared;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mohareb returns,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Circle is drawn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Victims have bled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Youth and the Maid.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She in the circle holds in either hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Clenched by the hair, a head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The heads of the Youth and the Maid.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Go out ye lights!” quoth Khawla,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in darkness began the spell.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>With spreading arms she whirls around</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rapidly, rapidly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ever around and around;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And loudly she calls the while</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Eblis! Eblis!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Loudly, incessantly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still she calls “Eblis! Eblis!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Giddily, giddily, still she whirls,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Loudly, incessantly, still she calls;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The motion is ever the same,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ever around and around;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The calling is still the same</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still it is “Eblis! Eblis!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And her voice is a shapeless yell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And dizzily rolls her brain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now she is full of the Fiend.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She stops, she rocks, she reels!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Look! look! she appears in the darkness!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her flamy hairs curl up</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All living, like the Meteor’s locks of light!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her eyes are like the sickly Moon!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>It is her lips that move,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her tongue that shapes the sound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But whose is the Voice that proceeds?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Ye may hope and ye may fear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“The danger of his stars is near.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Sultan! if he perish, woe!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Fate has written one death-blow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“For Mohareb and the Foe?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Triumph! triumph! only she</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“That knit his bonds can set him free.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She spake the Oracle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And senselessly she fell.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They knelt in care beside her,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her Sister and the King.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They sprinkled her palms with water,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They wetted her nostrils with blood.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She wakes as from a dream,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She asks the uttered Voice,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But when she heard, an anger and a grief</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Darkened her wrinkling brow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Then let him live in long captivity!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She answered: but Mohareb’s quickened eye</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Perused her sullen countenance</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That lied not with the lips.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A miserable man!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What boots it, that, in central caves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Powers of Evil at his Baptism pledged</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Sacrament of Hell?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His death secures them now.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What boots it that they gave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Abdaldar’s guardian ring,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When thro’ another’s life</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The blow may reach his own?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He sought the dungeon cell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where Thalaba was laid.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Twas the grey morning twilight, and the voice</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Thalaba in prayer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With words of hallowed import, smote</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The King’s alarmed sense.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The grating of the heavy hinge</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Roused not the Arabian youth;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor lifted he his earthward face</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At sound of coming feet.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor did Mohareb with unholy voice</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Disturb the duty: silent, spirit-awed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Envious, heart-humbled, he beheld</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The dungeon-peace of piety</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till Thalaba, the perfect rite performed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Raised his calm eye; then spake the Island-Chief.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Arab! my guidance thro’ the dangerous Cave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Thy service overpaid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“An unintended friend in enmity.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“The hand that caught thy ring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Received and bore me to the scene I sought.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Now know me grateful. I return</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“That amulet, thy only safety here.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Artful he spake, with show of gratitude</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Veiling the selfish deed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Locked in the magic chain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The powerless hand of Thalaba</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Received again the Spell.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Remembering then with what an ominous faith</span>
				<br/>
				<span>First he drew on the gem,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Youth repeats his words of augury;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“In God’s name and the Prophet’s! be its power</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Good, let it serve the holy! if for evil</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“God and my faith shall hallow it.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Blindly the wicked work</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“The righteous will of Heaven!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So Thalaba received again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The written ring of gold.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thoughtful awhile Mohareb stood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And eyed the captive youth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then, building skilfully the sophist speech,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus he began. “Brave art thou, Thalaba!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“And wherefore are we foes!⁠ ⁠… for I would buy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Thy friendship at a princely price, and make thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“To thine own welfare wise.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Hear me! in Nature are two hostile Gods,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Makers and Masters of existing things,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Equal in power:⁠ ⁠… nay hear me patiently!⁠ ⁠…</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Equal⁠ ⁠… for look around thee! the same Earth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Bears fruit and poison; where the Camel finds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“His fragrant<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-145" id="noteref-145" epub:type="noteref">145</a> food, the horned Viper there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Sucks in the juice of death; the Elements</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Now serve the use of man, and now assert</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Dominion o’er his weakness; dost thou hear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“The sound of merriment and nuptial song?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“From the next house proceeds the mourner’s cry</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Lamenting o’er the dead. Sayest thou that Sin</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Entered the world of Allah? that the Fiend</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Permitted for a season, prowls for prey?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“When to thy tent the venomous serpent creeps</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Dost thou not crush the reptile? even so,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Besure, had Allah crushed his Enemy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“But that the power was wanting. From the first,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Eternal as themselves their warfare is,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“To the end it must endure. Evil and Good.⁠ ⁠…</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“What are they Thalaba but words? in the strife</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Of Angels, as of men, the weak are guilty;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Power must decide. The Spirits of the Dead</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Quitting their mortal mansion, enter not,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“As falsely ye are preached, their final seat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Of bliss, or bale; nor in the sepulchre</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Sleep they the long long sleep: each joins the host</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Of his great Leader, aiding in the war</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Whose fate involves his own.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Woe to the vanquished then!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Woe to the sons of man who followed him!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“They with their Leader, thro’ eternity,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Must howl in central fires.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Thou Thalaba hast chosen ill thy part,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“If choice it may be called, where will was not,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Nor searching doubt, nor judgement wise to weigh.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Hard is the service of the Power beneath</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Whose banners thou wert born; his discipline</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Severe, yea cruel; and his wages, rich</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Only in promise; who has seen the pay?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“For us⁠ ⁠… the pleasures of the world are ours,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Riches and rule, the kingdoms of the Earth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“We met in Babylon adventurers both,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Each zealous for the hostile Power he served:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“We meet again; thou feelest what thou art,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Thou seest what I am, the Sultan here,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“The Lord of Life and Death.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Abandon him who has abandoned thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“And be as I am, great among mankind!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The Captive did not, hasty to confute</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Break of that subtle speech,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But when the expectant silence of the King</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Looked for his answer, then spake Thalaba.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“And this then is thy faith! this monstrous creed!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“This lie against the Sun and Moon and Stars</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“And Earth and Heaven! blind man who canst not see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“How all things work the best! who wilt not know</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“That in the Manhood of the World, whate’er</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Of folly marked its Infancy, of vice</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Sullied its Youth, ripe Wisdom shall cast off,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Stablished in good, and knowing evil safe.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Sultan Mohareb, yes, ye have me here</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“In chains; but not forsaken, tho’ opprest:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Cast down, but not destroyed. Shall danger daunt,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Shall death dismay his soul, whose life is given</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“For God and for his brethren of mankind?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Alike rewarded, in that noble cause,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“The Conquerors and the Martyrs palm above</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Beam with one glory. Hope ye that my blood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Can quench the dreaded flame? and know ye not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“That leagued against you are the Just and Wise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“And all Good Actions of all ages past,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Yea your own Crimes, and Truth, and God in Heaven!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Slave!” quoth Mohareb, and his lips</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quivered with eager wrath.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I have thee! thou shalt feel my power,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“And in thy dungeon loathsomeness</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Rot piece-meal, limb from limb!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And out the Tyrant rushes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all impatient of the thoughts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That cankered in his heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seeks in the giddiness of boisterous sport</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Short respite from the avenging power within.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>What Woman is she</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So wrinkled and old,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That goes to the wood?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She leans on her staff</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With a tottering step,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She tells her bead-strings slow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thro’ fingers dulled by age.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wanton boys bemock her.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The babe in arms that meets her</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Turns round with quick affright</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And clings to his nurse’s neck.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Hark! hark! the hunter’s cry</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mohareb gone to the chase!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The dogs with eager yell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are struggling to be free;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hawks in frequent stoop</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Token their haste for flight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And couchant on the saddle-bow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With tranquil eyes and talons sheathed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ounce expects his liberty.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Propt on the staff that shakes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beneath her trembling weight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Old Woman sees them pass.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Halloa! halloa!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The game is up!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The dogs are loosed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The deer bounds over the plain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The lagging dogs behind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Follow from afar!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But lo! the Falcon o’er his head.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hovers with hostile<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-146" id="noteref-146" epub:type="noteref">146</a> wings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And buffets him with blinding strokes!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dizzy with the deafening strokes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In blind and interrupted course,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Poor beast be struggles on;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now the dogs are nigh!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How his heart pants! you see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The panting of his heart;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And tears like human tears</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Roll down, along the big veins, fever-swoln;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now the death-sweat<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-147" id="noteref-147" epub:type="noteref">147</a> darkens his dun hide!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His fear, his groans, his agony, his death,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are the sport and the joy and the triumph!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Halloa! another prey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The nimble Antelope!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Ounce<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-148" id="noteref-148" epub:type="noteref">148</a> is freed; one spring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And his talons are sheathed in her shoulders,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And his teeth are red in her gore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There came a sound from the wood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like the howl of the winter wind at night</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Around a lonely dwelling,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Ounce whose gums were warm in his prey</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He hears the summoning sound.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In vain his master’s voice</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No longer dreaded now,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Calls and recalls with threatful tone.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Away to the forest he goes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For that Old Woman had laid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her shrivelled finger on her shrivelled lips,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And whistled with a long, long breath,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And that long breath was the sound</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like the howl of the winter wind at night</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Around a lonely dwelling.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Mohareb knew her not,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As to the chase he went,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The glance of his proud eye</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Passing in scorn o’er age and wretchedness.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She stands in the depth of the wood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And panting to her feet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fawning and fearful creeps the charmed ounce.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Well mayst thou fear, and vainly dost thou fawn!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her form is changed, her visage new,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her power, her heart the same!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It is Khawla that stands in the wood.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She knew the place where the mandrake grew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And round the neck of the ounce,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And round the mandrake’s head</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She tightens the ends of her cord.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her ears are closed with wax,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And her prest finger fastens them,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deaf as the Adder, when with grounded head</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And circled form, her avenues of sound</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Barred safely, one slant eye</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Watches the charmer’s lips</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Waste on the wind his<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-149" id="noteref-149" epub:type="noteref">149</a> baffled witchery.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The spotted ounce so beautiful</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Springs forceful from the scourge:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The dying plant all agony,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Feeling its life-strings crack,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Uttered the unimaginable groan</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That none can hear and live.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then from her victim servant Khawla loosed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The precious poison, next with naked hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She plucked the boughs of the manchineel.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then of the wormy wax she took,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That from the perforated<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-150" id="noteref-150" epub:type="noteref">150</a> tree forced out,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bewrayed its insect-parent’s work within.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>In a cavern of the wood she sits</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And moulds the wax to human form,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And as her fingers kneaded it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By magic accents, to the mystic shape</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Imparted with the life of Thalaba,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In all its passive powers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mysterious sympathy.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the Mandrake and the Manchineel</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She builds her pile accurst.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She lays her finger to the pile,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And blue and green, the flesh</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Glows with emitted fire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A fire<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-151" id="noteref-151" epub:type="noteref">151</a> to kindle that strange fuel meet.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before the fire she placed the imaged wax,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“There<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-152" id="noteref-152" epub:type="noteref">152</a> waste away!” the Enchantress cried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“And with thee waste Hodeirah’s Son!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Fool! fool! go thaw the everlasting ice,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose polar mountains bound the human reign.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blindly the wicked work</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The righteous will of Heaven!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The doomed Destroyer wears Abdaldar’s ring!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against the danger of his horoscope</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yourselves have shielded him!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And on the sympathizing wax</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The unadmitted flames play powerlessly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As the cold moon-beam on a plain of snow.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Curse thee! curse thee!” cried the fiendly woman,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Hast thou yet a spell of safety?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in the raging flames</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She cast the imaged wax.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It lay amid the flames,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like Polycarp of old,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When by the glories of the burning stake</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er vaulted, his grey hairs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Curled, life-like, to the fire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That haloed round his saintly brow.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Wherefore is this!” cried Khawla, and she stamped</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thrice on the cavern floor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Maimuna! Maimuna!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thrice on the floor she stamped,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then to the rocky gateway glanced</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her eager eyes, and Maimuna was there.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Nay Sister, nay!” quoth she, “Mohareb’s life</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Is linked with Thalaba’s!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Nay Sister, nay! the plighted oath!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“The common Sacrament!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Idiot!” said Khawla, “one must die, or all!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Faith kept with him were treason to the rest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Why lies the wax, like marble, in the fire?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“What powerful amulet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Protects Hodeirah’s son?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Cold, marble-cold, the wax</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lay on the raging pile,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cold in that white intensity of fire.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Bat that with her hooked and leathery wings</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Clung to the cave-roof, loosed her hold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Death-sickening with the heat;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Toad who to the darkest nook had crawled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Panted fast with fever pain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Viper from her nest came forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leading her quickened brood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who sportive with the warm delight, rolled out</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their thin curls, tender as the tendril rings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ere the green beauty of their brittle youth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grows brown, and toughens in the summer sun.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cold, marble-cold, the wax</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lay on the raging pile,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The silver quivering of the element</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er its pale surface shedding a dim gloss.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Amid the red and fiery smoke,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Watching the strange portent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The blue-eyed Sorceress and her Sister stood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seeming a ruined Angel by the side</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Spirit born in Hell.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At length raised Maimuna her thoughtful eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Whence Sister was the wax</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“The work of the worm, or the bee?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Nay then I marvel not!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“It were as wise to bring from Ararat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“The fore-world’s<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-153" id="noteref-153" epub:type="noteref">153</a> wood to build the magic pile,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“And feed it from the balm bower, thro’ whose veins</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“The Martyr’s blood sends such a virtue out,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“That the fond Mother from beneath its shade</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Wreathes the Cerastes<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-154" id="noteref-154" epub:type="noteref">154</a> round her playful child.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“This the eternal, universal strife!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“There is a grave-wax,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-155" id="noteref-155" epub:type="noteref">155</a>⁠ ⁠… I have seen the Gouls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Fight for the dainty at their banquetting.”⁠ ⁠…</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Excellent witch!” quoth Khawla; and she went</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the cave arch of entrance, and scowled up,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mocking the blessed Sun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Shine thou in Heaven, but I will shadow Earth!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Thou wilt not shorten day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“But I will hasten darkness!” Then the Witch</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Began a magic song,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One long low tone thro’ teeth half-closed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thro’ lips slow-moving muttered slow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One long-continued breath,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till to her eyes a darker yellowness</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was driven, and fuller swoln the prominent veins</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On her loose throat grew black.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then looking upward thrice she breathed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into the face of Heaven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The baneful breath infected Heaven;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A mildewing mist it spread</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Darker and darker; so the evening sun</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Poured his unentering glory on the mist,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And it was night below.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Bring now the wax,” quoth Khawla, “for thou knowest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“The mine that yields it!” forth went Maimuna,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In mist and darkness went the Sorceress forth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And she has reached the place of Tombs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in their sepulchres the dead</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Feel<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-156" id="noteref-156" epub:type="noteref">156</a> feet unholy trampling over them.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thou startest Maimuna,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Because the breeze is in thy lilted locks!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is Khawla’s spell so weak?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sudden came the breeze and strong;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mist that in the labouring lungs was felt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So heavy late, flies now before the gale,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thin as an Infant’s breath</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seen in the sunshine of an autumn frost.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sudden it came and soon its work was done,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And suddenly it ceased;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cloudless and calm it left the firmament,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And beautiful in the blue sky</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Arose the summer Moon.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She heard the quickened action of her blood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She felt the fever in her cheeks.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Daunted, yet desperate, in a tomb</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Entering, with impious hand she traced</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Circles, and squares, and trines,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And magic characters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till riven by her charms the grave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yawned and disclosed its dead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Maimuna’s eyes were opened, and she saw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The secrets of the grave.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>There sate a Spirit in the vault,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In shape, in hue, in lineaments like life,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And by him couched, as if intranced,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hundred-headed Worm that never dies.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Nay Sorceress! not to-night!” the Spirit cried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“The flesh in which I sinned may rest to-night</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“From suffering; all things, even I to-night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Even the Damned repose!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The flesh of Maimuna</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Crept on her bones with terror, and her knees</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Trembled with their trembling weight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Only this sabbath! and at dawn the Worm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Will wake, and this poor flesh must grow to meet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“The gnawing of his hundred<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-157" id="noteref-157" epub:type="noteref">157</a> poison-mouths!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“God! God! Is there no mercy after death?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Soul-struck she rushed away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She fled the place of Tombs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She cast herself upon the earth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All agony and tumult and despair.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in that wild and desperate agony</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sure Maimuna had died the utter death,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If aught of evil had been possible</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On this mysterious night;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For this was that most holy<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-158" id="noteref-158" epub:type="noteref">158</a> night</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When all created things know and adore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Power that made them; insects, beasts, and birds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The water-dwellers, herbs and trees and stones,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yea Earth and Ocean and the infinite Heaven</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With all its worlds. Man only does not know</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The universal sabbath, does not join</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With Nature in her homage. Yet the prayer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flows from the righteous with intenser love,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A holier calm succeeds, and sweeter dreams</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Visit the slumbers of the penitent.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Therefore on Maimuna the elements,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shed healing; every breath she breathed was balm.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was not a flower but sent in incense up</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its richest odours, and the song of birds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now, like the music of the Seraphim,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Entered her soul, and now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Made silence aweful by their sudden pause.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It seemed as if the quiet moon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Poured quietness, its lovely light</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was like the smile of reconciling Heaven.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Is it the dew of night</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That down her glowing cheek</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shines in the moon-beam? oh! she weeps⁠ ⁠… she weeps</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the Good Angel that abandoned her</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At her hell-baptism, by her tears drawn down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Resumes his charge, then Maimuna</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Recalled to mind the double oracle;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quick as the lightening flash</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its import glanced upon her, and the hope</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of pardon and salvation rose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As now she understood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The lying prophecy of truth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She pauses not, she ponders not,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The driven air before her fanned the face</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Thalaba, and he awoke and saw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Sorceress of the silver locks.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>One more permitted spell!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She takes the magic chain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the wide eye of wonder, Thalaba</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Watches her snowy fingers round and round</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wind the loosening chain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Again he hears the low sweet voice,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The low sweet voice so musical,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That sure it was not strange,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If in those unintelligible tones</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was more than human potency,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That with such deep and undefined delight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Filled the surrendered soul.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The work is done, the song is ceased;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He wakes as from a dream of Paradise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And feels his fetters gone, and with the burst</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of wondering adoration praises God.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Her charm has loosed the chain it bound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But massy walls and iron gates</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Confine Hodeirah’s son.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heard ye not, Genii of the Air, her spell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That o’er her face there flits</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sudden flush of fear?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Again her louder lips repeat the charm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her eye is anxious, her cheek pale,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her pulse plays fast and feeble.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nay Maimuna! thy power has ceased,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the wind scatters now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The voice that ruled it late.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Pray for me, Thalaba,” she cried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“For death and judgement are at hand!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All night in agony,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She feared the instant blow of Hell’s revenge.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At dawn the sound of gathering multitudes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Led to the prison bars her dreading eye.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What spectacle invites</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The growing multitude,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That torrent-like they roll along?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Boys and grey-headed age; the Mother comes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leading her child, who at arm’s length</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Outstripping her, looks back</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bids her hasten more.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Why does the City pour her thousands forth?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What glorious pageantry</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Makes her streets desolate, and silences</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her empty dwellings? comes the bridal pomp,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And have the purveyors of imperial lust</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Torn from their parents arms again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The virgin beauties of the land?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will elephants in gilded cages bear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The imprisoned victims? or may yet their eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With a last look of liberty, behold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Banners and guards and silk-arched palanquins.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The long procession, and the gorgeous pomp</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of their own sacrifice?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the house tops and in the windows ranged</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Face above face, they wait</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The coming spectacle;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The trees are clustered, and below the dust</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thro’ the thronged populace</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Can find no way to rise.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He comes! the Sultan! hark the swelling horn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The trumpet’s spreading blair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The timbrel tinkling as its silver bells</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Twinkle aloft, and the shrill cymbal’s sound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose broad brass flashes in the morning sun</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Accordant light and music! closing all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The heavy Gong is heard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That falls like thunder on the dizzy ear.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>On either hand the thick-wedged crowd</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fall from the royal path.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Recumbent in the palanquin he casts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the wide tumult of the waving throng</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A proud and idle eye.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now in his tent alighted, he receives</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Homage and worship. The slave multitude</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With shouts of blasphemy adore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Him, father of his people! him their Lord!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Great King, all-wise, all-mighty, and all-good!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose smile was happiness, whose frown was death,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their present Deity!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>With silken cords his slaves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wave the silk<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-159" id="noteref-159" epub:type="noteref">159</a> fan, that waving o’er his head</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Freshens the languid air.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Others the while shower o’er his robes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rose’s treasured sweets,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rich odours burn before him, ambergrese,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sandal and aloe wood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thus inhaling the voluptuous air</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He sits to watch the agony,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To hear the groan of death.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>At once all sounds are hushed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All eyes take one direction, for he comes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The object he of this day’s festival,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of all this expectation and this joy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Christian captive. Hark! so silently</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They stand, the clanking of his chain is heard.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he has reached the place of suffering now.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And as the death’s-men round his ancles bind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The cords and to the gibbet swing him up,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Priests begin their song, the song of praise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hymn of glory to their Devil-God.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then Maimuna grew pale, as thro the bars</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She saw the Martyr pendant by the feet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His gold locks hanging downwards, and she cried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“This is my Sister’s deed!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“O Thalaba, for us,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Not for his faith the red-haired Christian dies.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“She wants the foam<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-160" id="noteref-160" epub:type="noteref">160</a> that in his agony,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Last from his lips shall fall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“The deadliest poison that the Devils know.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Son of Hodeirah, thou and I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Shall prove its deadly force!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And lo! the Executioners begin</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And beat his belly with alternate blows.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And these are human that look on;⁠ ⁠…</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The very women that would shrink</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And shudder if they saw a worm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Crushed by the careless tread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They clap their hands for joy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lift their children up</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To see the Christian die.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Convulsing Nature with her tortures drunk</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ceases to suffer now.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His eye-lids tremble, his lips quake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But like the quivering of a severed limb</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Move no responsive pang.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now catch the exquisite poison! for it froths</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His dying lips,⁠ ⁠… and Khawla holds the bowl.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Enough the Island crimes had cried to Heaven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The measure of their guilt was full,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hour of wrath was come.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The poison burst the bowl,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It fell upon the earth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Sorceress shrieked and caught Mohareb’s robe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And called the whirlwind and away!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For lo! from that accursed venom springs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Upas Tree of Death.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
