<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Book XI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="book-11" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Book</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XI</span>
				</h2>
				<blockquote epub:type="epigraph z3998:verse">
					<p>
						<span>Those, Sir, that traffic in these seas,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Fraught not their bark with fears.</span>
					</p>
					<cite>Sir Robert Howard</cite>
				</blockquote>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span>O fool to think thy human hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Could check the chariot-wheels of Destiny</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To dream of weakness in the all-knowing Mind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That his decrees should change!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To hope that the united Powers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Earth, and Air, and Hell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Might blot one letter from the Book of Fate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Might break one link of the eternal chain!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou miserable, wicked, poor old man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fall now upon the body of thy child,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beat now thy breast, and pluck the bleeding hairs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From thy grey beard, and lay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thine ineffectual hand to close her wound.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And call on Hell to aid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And call on Heaven to send</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its merciful thunderbolt!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The young Arabian silently</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beheld his frantic grief.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The presence of the hated youth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To raging anguish stung</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wretched Sorcerer.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Aye! look and triumph!” he exclaimed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“This is the justice of thy God!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A righteous God is he, to let</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His vengeance fall upon the innocent head!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Curse thee, curse thee, Thalaba!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>All feelings of revenge</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had left Hodeirah’s son.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pitying and silently he heard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The victim of his own iniquities,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not with the busy hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Consolation, fretting the sore wound</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He could not hope to heal.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So as the Servant of the Prophet stood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With sudden motion the night air</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gently fanned his cheek.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Twas a Green Bird whose wings</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had waved the quiet air.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the hand of Thalaba</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Green Bird perched, and turned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A mild eye up, as if to win</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Adventurer’s confidence.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then springing on flew forward,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now again returns</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To court him to the way;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now his hand perceives</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her rosy feet press firmer, as she leaps</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the wing again.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Obedient to the call,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the pale moonlight Thalaba pursued</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er trackless snows his way;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unknowing he what blessed messenger</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had come to guide his steps,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That Laila’s Spirit went before his path.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brought up in darkness and the child of sin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet as the meed of spotless innocence,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Just Heaven permitted her by one good deed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To work her own redemption, after death;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So till the judgement day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She might abide in bliss,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Green<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-173" id="noteref-173" epub:type="noteref">173</a> warbler of the Bowers of Paradise.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The morning sun came forth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wakening no eye to life</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In this wide solitude;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His radiance with a saffron hue, like heat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Suffused the desert snow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Green Bird guided Thalaba,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now oaring with slow wing her upward way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Descending now in slant descent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On out-spread pinions motionless,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Floating now with rise and fall alternate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As if the billows of the air</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heaved her with their sink and swell.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And when, beneath the noon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The icey glitter of the snow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dazzled his aching sight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then on his arm alighted the Green Bird</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And spread before his eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her plumage of refreshing hue.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Evening came on; the glowing clouds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tinged with a purple ray the mountain ridge</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That lay before the Traveller.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ah! whither art thou gone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Guide and companion of the youth, whose eye</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Has lost thee in the depth of Heaven?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why hast thou left alone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The weary wanderer in the wilderness?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now the western clouds grow pale</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Night descends upon his solitude.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The Arabian youth knelt down,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bowed his forehead to the ground</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And made his evening prayer.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When he arose the stars were bright in heaven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sky was blue, and the cold Moon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shone over the cold snow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A speck in the air!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is it his guide that approaches?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For it moves with the motion of life!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lo! she returns and scatters from her pinions</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Odours diviner than the gales of morning</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Waft from Sabea.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Hovering before the youth she hung,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till from her rosy feet that at his touch</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Uncurled their grasp, he took</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fruitful bough they bore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He took and tasted, a new life</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flowed thro’ his renovated frame;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His limbs that late were sore and stiff</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Felt all the freshness of repose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His dizzy brain was calmed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The heavy aching of his lids</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At once was taken off,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For Laila from the Bowers of Paradise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had borne the healing<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-174" id="noteref-174" epub:type="noteref">174</a> fruit.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So up the mountain steep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With untired foot he past,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Green Bird guiding him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mid crags, and ice, and rocks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A difficult way, winding the long ascent.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How then the heart of Thalaba rejoiced</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When bosomed in the mountain depths,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A sheltered Valley opened on his view!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It was the Simorg’s vale,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The dwelling of the ancient Bird.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>On a green and mossy bank.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beside a rivulet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Bird of Ages stood.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No sound intruded on his solitude,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Only the rivulet was heard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose everlasting flow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the birth-day of the world had made</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The same unvaried murmuring.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here dwelt the all-knowing Bird</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In deep tranquillity,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His eyelids ever closed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In full enjoyment of profound repose.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Reverently the youth approached</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That old and only<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-175" id="noteref-175" epub:type="noteref">175</a> Bird,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And crossed his arms upon his breast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bowed his head and spake.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Earliest of existing things,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Earliest thou, and wisest thou,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Guide me, guide me, on my way!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I am bound to seek the caverns</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Underneath the roots of Ocean</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where the Sorcerer brood are nurst.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou the eldest, thou the wisest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Guide me, guide me, on my way!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The ancient Simorg on the youth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unclosed his thoughtful eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And answered to his prayer.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Northward by the stream proceed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the fountain of the rock</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wash away thy worldly stains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Kneel thou there, and seek the Lord</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And fortify thy soul with prayer.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus prepared ascend the Sledge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be bold, be wary, seek and find!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>God hath appointed all.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ancient Simorg then let fall his lids</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Returning to repose.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Northward along the rivulet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The adventurer went his way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tracing its waters upward to their source.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Green Bird of Paradise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou hast not left the youth;⁠ ⁠…</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With slow associate flight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She companies his way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now they reach the fountain of the rock.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>There in the cold clear well</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thalaba washed away his earthly stains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bowed his face before the Lord,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And fortified his soul with prayer.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The while upon the rock</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stood the celestial Bird,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And pondering all the perils he must pass,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With a mild melancholy eye</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beheld the youth beloved.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And lo! beneath yon lonely pine, the sledge⁠ ⁠…</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And there they stand the harnessed Dogs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their wide eyes watching for the youth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their ears erected turned towards his way.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They were lean as lean might be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their furrowed ribs rose prominent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And they were black from head to foot,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Save a white line on every breast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Curved like the crescent moon.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he is seated in the sledge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His arms are folded on his breast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bird is on his knees;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There is fear in the eyes of the Dogs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There is fear in their pitiful moan,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now they turn their heads,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And seeing him there, Away!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The Youth with the start of their speed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Falls back to the bar of the sledge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His hair floats straight in the stream of the wind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like the weeds in the running brook.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They wind with speed the upward way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An icey path thro’ rocks of ice,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His eye is at the summit now,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thus far all is dangerless,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now upon the height</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The black Dogs pause and pant,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They turn their eyes to Thalaba</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As if to plead for pity,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They moan and moan with fear.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Once more away! and now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The long descent is seen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A long, long, narrow path.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ice-rocks aright and hills of snow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aleft the giddy precipice.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be firm, be firm, O Thalaba!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One motion now, one bend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And on the crags below</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy shattered flesh will harden in the frost.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why howl the Dogs so mournfully?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wherefore does the blood flow fast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All purple o’er their sable hair?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His arms are folded on his breast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor scourge nor goad has he,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No hand appears to strike,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No sounding lash is heard:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But piteously they moan and moan</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And track their way with blood.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And lo! on yonder height</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A giant Fiend aloft</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Waits to thrust down the tottering Avalanche!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If Thalaba looks back he dies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The motion of fear is death.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On⁠ ⁠… on⁠ ⁠… with swift and steady pace</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Adown that dreadful way!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The youth is firm, the Dogs are fleet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Sledge goes rapidly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The thunder of the avalanche</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Re-echoes far behind.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On⁠ ⁠… on⁠ ⁠… with swift and steady pace</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Adown that dreadful way!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Dogs are fleet, the way is steep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Sledge goes rapidly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They reach the plain below.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>A wide, wide plain, all desolate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor tree, nor bush, nor herb!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On go the Dogs with rapid step,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Sledge slides after rapidly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now the Sun went down.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They stopped and looked at Thalaba,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Youth performed his prayer;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They knelt beside him as he prayed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They turned their heads to Mecca</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And tears ran down their cheeks.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then down they laid them in the snow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As close as they could lie,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They laid them down and slept.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And backward in the sledge</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Adventurer laid him down,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There peacefully slept Thalaba,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the Green Bird of Paradise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lay in his bosom warm.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The Dogs awoke him at the dawn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They knelt and wept again;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then rapidly they journeyed on,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And still the plain was desolate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor tree, nor bush, nor herb!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And ever at the hour of prayer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They stopped, and knelt, and wept;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And still that green and graceful Bird</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was as a friend to him by day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And ever when at night he slept</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lay in his bosom warm.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In that most utter solitude</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It cheered his heart to hear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her soft and soothing voice;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her voice was soft and sweet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It swelled not with the blackbird’s thrill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor warbled rich like the dear bird, that holds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The solitary man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A loiterer in his thoughtful walk at eve;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But if no overflowing joy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spake in its tones of tenderness</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They soothed the softened soul.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her bill was not the beak of blood;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There was a human meaning in her eye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its mild affection fixed on Thalaba</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Woke wonder while he gazed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And made her dearer for the mystery.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Oh joy! the signs of life appear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The first and single Fir</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That on the limits of the living world</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strikes in the ice its roots.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Another, and another now;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now the Larch that flings its arms</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Down arching like the falling wave;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now the Aspin’s scattered leaves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grey glitter on the moveless twig;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Poplar’s varying verdure now,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now the Birch so beautiful,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Light as a Lady’s plumes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Oh joy! the signs of life! the Deer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hath left his slot beside the way;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The little Ermine now is seen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>White wanderer of the snow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now from yonder pines they hear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The clatter of the Grouse’s wings:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now the snowy Owl pursues</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Traveller’s sledge in hope of food;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hark! the rosy-breasted bird</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Throstle of sweet song!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Joy! joy! the winter-wilds are left!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Green bushes now and greener grass,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Red thickets here all berry-bright,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And here the lovely flowers!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>When the last morning of their way arrived,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>After the early prayer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Green Bird fixed on Thalaba</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A sad and supplicating eye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with a human voice she spake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Servant of God, I leave thee now.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If rightly I have guided thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Give me the boon I beg!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O gentle Bird,” quoth Thalaba,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Guide and companion of my dangerous way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Friend and sole solace of my solitude,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How can I pay thee benefits like these!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ask what thou wilt that I can give,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O gentle Bird, the poor return</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will leave me debtor still!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Son of Hodeirah!” she replied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“When thou shalt see an Old Man crushed beneath</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The burden of his earthly punishment,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forgive him, Thalaba!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yea, send a prayer to God on his behalf!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>A flush o’erspread the young Destroyer’s cheek,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He turned his eye towards the Bird</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As if in half repentance; for he thought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Okba; and his Father’s dying groan</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Came on his memory. The celestial Bird</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Saw and renewed her speech.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“O Thalaba, if she who in thine arms</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Received the dagger-blow and died for thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deserve one kind remembrance⁠ ⁠… save, O save</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Father that she loved from endless death!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Laila! and is it thou?” the youth replied:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“What is there that I durst refuse to thee?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This is no time to harbour in my heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One evil thought⁠ ⁠… here I put off revenge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The last rebellious feeling⁠ ⁠… be it so!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>God grant to me the pardon that I need</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As I do pardon him!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But who am I that I should save</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sinful soul alive?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Enough!” said Laila. “When the hour shall come</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Remember me! my task is done.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We meet again in Paradise!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She said and shook her wings, and up she soared</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With arrow-swiftness thro’ the heights of Heaven.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>His aching eye pursued her path,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When starting onward went the Dogs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>More rapidly they hurried on</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In hope of near repose.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It was the early morning yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When by the well-head of a brook</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They stopped, their journey done.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The spring was clear, the water deep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A venturous man were he and rash</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That should have probed its depths,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For all its loosened bed below</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heaved strangely up and down,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And to and fro, from side to side</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It heaved, and waved, and tossed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yet the depths were clear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yet no ripple wrinkled o’er</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The face of that fair Well.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And on that Well so strange and fair</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A little boat there lay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Without on oar, without a sail,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One only seat it had, one seat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As if for only Thalaba.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And at the helm a Damsel stood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A Damsel bright and bold of eye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet did a maiden modesty</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Adorn her fearless brow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She seemed sorrowful, but sure</span>
				<br/>
				<span>More beautiful for sorrow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To her the Dogs looked wistful up,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then their tongues were loosed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Have we done well, O Mistress dear!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And shall our sufferings end?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The gentle Damsel made reply,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Poor Servants of the God I serve,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When all this witchery is destroyed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Your woes will end with mine.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A hope, alas! how long unknown!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This new adventurer gives:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now God forbid that he, like you,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should perish for his fears!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Poor Servants of the God I serve</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wait ye the event in peace.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A deep and total slumber as she spake</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seized them. Sleep on, poor sufferers! be at rest!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ye wake no more to anguish. Ye have borne</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Chosen, the Destroyer! soon his hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall strike the efficient blow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Soon shaking off your penal forms shall ye</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With songs of joy amid the Eden groves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hymn the Deliverer’s praise!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then did the Damsel say to Thalaba,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“The morn is young, the Sun is fair</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And pleasantly thro’ pleasant banks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The quiet brook flows on⁠ ⁠…</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wilt thou embark with me?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou knowest not the water’s way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Think Stranger well! and night must come,⁠ ⁠…</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wilt thou embark with me?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thro’ fearful perils thou must pass,⁠ ⁠…</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stranger, the oppressed ask thine aid!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou wilt embark with me!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She smiled in tears upon the youth,⁠ ⁠…</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What heart were his who could gainsay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That melancholy smile?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Sail on, sail on,” quoth Thalaba,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Sail on, in Allah’s name!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He sat him on the single seat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The little boat moved on.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thro’ pleasant banks the quiet brook</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Went winding pleasantly;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By fragrant fir groves now it past,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now thro’ alder-shores,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thro’ green and fertile meadows now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It silently ran by.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The flag-flower blossomed on its side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The willow tresses waved,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The flowing current furrowed round</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The water-lilly’s floating leaf,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fly of green and gauzy wing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fell sporting down its course.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And grateful to the voyager</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The freshness of the running stream,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The murmur round the prow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The little boat falls rapidly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Adown the rapid brook.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But many a silent spring meantime,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And many a rivulet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had swoln the growing brook,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when the southern Sun began</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To wind the downward way of heaven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It ran a river deep and wide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thro’ banks that widened still.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then once again the Damsel spake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“The stream is strong, the river broad,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wilt thou go on with me?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The day is fair but night must come⁠ ⁠…</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wilt thou go on with me?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far far away the mourner’s eye</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is watching; for our little boat⁠ ⁠…</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou wilt go on with me!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Sail on, sail on,” quoth Thalaba,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Sail on, in Allah’s name!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The little boat falls rapidly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Adown the river-stream.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>A broader and a broader stream.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That rocked the little boat!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Cormorant stands upon its shoals,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His black and dripping wings</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Half opened to the wind.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Sun goes down, the crescent Moon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is brightening in the firmament;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And what is yonder roar</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That sinking now and swelling now,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But roaring, roaring still,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still louder, louder, grows?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The little boat falls rapidly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Adown the rapid tide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Moon is bright above,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the wide Ocean opens on their way!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then did the Damsel speak again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Wilt thou go on with me?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Moon is bright, the sea is calm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I know well the ocean-paths;⁠ ⁠…</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wilt thou go on with me?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deliverer! yes! thou dost not fear!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou wilt go on with me!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Sail on, sail on!” quoth Thalaba</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Sail on, in Allah’s name!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The Moon is bright, the sea is calm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The little boat rides rapidly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Across the ocean waves;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The line of moonlight on the deep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still follows as they voyage on;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The winds are motionless;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The gentle waters gently part</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In murmurs round the prow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He looks above, he looks around,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The boundless heaven, the boundless sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The crescent moon, the little boat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nought else above, below.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The Moon is sunk, a dusky grey</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spreads o’er the Eastern sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Stars grow pale and paler;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Oh beautiful! the godlike Sun</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is rising o’er the sea!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Without an oar, without a sail</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The little boat rides rapidly;⁠ ⁠…</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is that a cloud that skirts the sea?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There is no cloud in heaven!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And nearer now, and darker now⁠ ⁠…</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It is⁠ ⁠… it is⁠ ⁠… the Land!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For yonder are the rocks that rise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dark in the reddening morn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For loud around their hollow base</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The surges rage and roar.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The little boat rides rapidly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now with shorter toss it heaves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the heavier swell;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now so near they see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The shelves and shadows of the cliff,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the low-lurking rocks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er whose black summits hidden-half</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The shivering billows burst.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And nearer now they feel the breaker’s spray.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then spake the Damsel, “yonder is our path</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beneath the cavern arch.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now is the ebb, and till the ocean-flow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We cannot over-ride the rocks.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Go thou and on the shore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Perform thy last ablutions, and with prayer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strengthen thy heart⁠ ⁠… I too have need to pray.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She held the helm with steady hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Amid the stronger waves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thro’ surge and surf she drove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The adventurer leapt to land.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
