<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Book V</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="book-5" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Book</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</span>
				</h2>
				<blockquote epub:type="epigraph">
					<p>Thou hast girded me with strength unto the battle; thou hast subdued under me those that rose up against me.</p>
					<cite>Psalm 18:39</cite>
				</blockquote>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span>When Thalaba from adoration rose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The air was cool, the sky</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With welcome clouds o’ercast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That soon came down in rain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He lifted up his fevered face to heaven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bared his head and stretched his hands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To that delightful shower,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And felt the coolness flow through every limb</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Freshening his powers of life.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>A loud quick panting! Thalaba looks up,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He starts, and his instinctive hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grasps the knife hilt: for close beside</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A Tyger passes him.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An indolent and languid eye</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The passing Tyger turned;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His head was hanging down,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His dry tongue lolling low,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the short panting of his fevered breath</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Came through his hot parched nostrils painfully.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The young Arabian knew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The purport of his hurried pace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And following him in hope</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Saw joyful from afar</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Tyger stoop and drink.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The desert Pelican had built her nest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In that deep solitude.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now returned from distant flight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fraught with the river stream,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her load of water had disburdened there.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her young in the refreshing bath</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sported all wantonness;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dipt down their callow heads,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Filled the swoln membrane from their plumeless throat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pendant, and bills yet soft,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And buoyant with arched breast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Plied in unpractised stroke</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The oars of their broad feet.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They, as the spotted prowler of the wild</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Laps the cool wave, around their mother croud,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And nestle underneath her outspread wings.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The spotted prowler of the wild</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lapt the cool wave,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-86" id="noteref-86" epub:type="noteref">86</a> and satiate from the nest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Guiltless of blood, withdrew.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The mother bird had moved not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But cowering o’er her nestlings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sat confident and fearless,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And watched the wonted guest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But when the human visitant approached,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The alarmed Pelican</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Retiring from that hostile shape,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gathers her young, and menaces with wings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And forward thrusts her threatening neck,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its feathers ruffling in her wrath,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bold with maternal fear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thalaba drank and in the water-skin</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hoarded the precious element.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not all he took, but in the large nest left</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Store that sufficed for life.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And journeying onward blest the Carrier Bird,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And blest in thankfulness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their common Father, provident for all.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>With strength renewed and confident in faith</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The son of Hodeirah proceeds;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till after the long toil of many a day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At length Bagdad appeared,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The City of his search.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He hastening to the gate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Roams o’er the city with insatiate eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its thousand dwellings o’er whose level roofs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fair cupolas appeared, and high-domed mosques</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And pointed minarets, and cypress groves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Every where scattered<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-87" id="noteref-87" epub:type="noteref">87</a> in unwithering green.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thou too art fallen, Bagdad! City of<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-88" id="noteref-88" epub:type="noteref">88</a> Peace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou too hast had thy day!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And loathsome Ignorance and brute Servitude</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pollute thy dwellings now,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Erst for the Mighty and the Wise renowned.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O yet illustrious for remembered fame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy founder the<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-89" id="noteref-89" epub:type="noteref">89</a> Victorious, and the pomp</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Haroun, for whose name by blood defiled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Jahia’s, and the blameless Barmecides’,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Genius hath wrought salvation; and the years</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When Science with the good al-Maimon dwelt;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So one day may the Crescent from thy Mosques</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be plucked by Wisdom, when the enlightened arm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Europe conquers to redeem the East.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then Pomp and Pleasure dwelt within her walls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Merchants of the East and of the West</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Met in her arched<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-90" id="noteref-90" epub:type="noteref">90</a> Bazars;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All day the active poor</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Showered a cool comfort o’er her thronging streets;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Labour was busy in her looms;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through all her open gates</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Long troops of laden Camels lined her roads,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Tigris on his tameless<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-91" id="noteref-91" epub:type="noteref">91</a> current bore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Armenian harvests to her multitudes.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But not in sumptuous Caravansary</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The adventurer idles there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor satiates wonder with her pomp and wealth;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A long day’s distance from the walls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stands ruined Babylon!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The time of action is at hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hope that for so many a year</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hath been his daily thought, his nightly dream,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stings to more restlessness.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He loathes all lingering that delays the hour</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When, full of glory, from his quest returned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He on the pillar of the Tent beloved</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall hang Hodeirah’s sword.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The many-coloured<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-92" id="noteref-92" epub:type="noteref">92</a> domes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet wore one dusky hue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Cranes upon the Mosque</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Kept their night-clatter<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-93" id="noteref-93" epub:type="noteref">93</a> still,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When through the gate the early Traveller past.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when at evening o’er the swampy plain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Bittern’s<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-94" id="noteref-94" epub:type="noteref">94</a> Boom came far,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Distinct in darkness seen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Above the low horizon’s lingering light</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rose the near ruins of old Babylon.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Once from her lofty walls<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-95" id="noteref-95" epub:type="noteref">95</a> the Charioteer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Looked down on swarming myriads; once she flung</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her arches o’er Euphrates conquered tide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And through her brazen portals when she poured</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her armies forth, the distant nations looked</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As men who watched the thunder-cloud in fear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lest it should burst above them. She was fallen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Queen of Cities, Babylon was fallen!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Low lay her bulwarks; the black scorpion basked</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the palace courts, within her sanctuary</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The She Wolf hid her whelps.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is yonder huge and shapeless heap, what once</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had been the aerial<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-96" id="noteref-96" epub:type="noteref">96</a> Gardens, height on height</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rising like Medias mountains crowned with wood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Work of imperial dotage? where the fame</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-97" id="noteref-97" epub:type="noteref">97</a> Belus? where the Golden Image now,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which at the sound of dulcimer and lute,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cornet and sackbut, harp and psaltery,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Assyrian slaves adored?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A labyrinth of ruins, Babylon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spreads o’er the blasted plain:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wandering Arab never sets his tent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within her walls; the Shepherd<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-98" id="noteref-98" epub:type="noteref">98</a> eyes afar</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her evil Towers, and devious drives his flock.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alone unchanged, a free and bridgeless tide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Euphrates rolls along,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Eternal Nature’s work.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Through the broken portal,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Over weedy fragments,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thalaba went his way.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cautious he trod, and felt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The dangerous ground before him with his bow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Chacal started at his steps,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Stork, alarmed at sound of man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From her broad nest upon the old pillar top,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Affrighted fled on flapping wings.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Adder in her haunts disturbed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lanced at the intruding staff her arrowy tongue.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Twilight and moonshine dimly mingling gave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An aweful light obscure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Evening not wholly closed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Moon still pale and faint.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An aweful light obscure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Broken by many a mass of blackest shade;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Long column stretching dark through weeds and moss,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Broad length of lofty wall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose windows lay in light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And of their former shape, low-arched or square,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rude outline on the earth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Figured, with long grass fringed.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Reclined against a column’s broken shaft,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unknowing whitherward to bend his way</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He stood and gazed around.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Ruins closed him in,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It seemed as if no foot of man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For ages had intruded there.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Soon at approaching step</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Starting, he turned and saw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A warrior in the moon beam drawing near.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forward the Stranger came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with a curious eye</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Perused the Arab youth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“And who art thou,” he cried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“That at an hour like this</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wanderest in Babylon?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A way-bewildered traveller, seekest thou</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ruinous shelter here?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or comest thou to hide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The plunder of the night?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or hast thou spells to make</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These ruins, yawning from their rooted base</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Disclose their secret<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-99" id="noteref-99" epub:type="noteref">99</a> wealth?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The youth replied, “nor wandering traveller</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor robber of the night</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor skilled in spells am I.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I seek the Angels here,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Haruth and Maruth. Stranger in thy turn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why wanderest thou in Babylon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And who art thou, the Questioner?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The man was fearless, and the tempered pride</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That toned the voice of Thalaba</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Displeased not him, himself of haughty heart.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heedless he answered, “knowest thou</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their cave of punishment?”</span>
			</p>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Thalaba</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Vainly I seek it.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Stranger</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Art thou firm of foot</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To tread the ways of danger?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Thalaba</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Point the path!</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Stranger</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Young Arab! if thou hast a heart can beat</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Evenly in danger, if thy bowels yearn not</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With human fears, at scenes where undisgraced</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The soldier tried in battle might look back</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And tremble, follow me!⁠ ⁠… for I am bound</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into that cave of horrors.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<p>
				<span>Thalaba</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gazed on his comrade, he was young, of port</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stately and strong; belike his face had pleased</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A woman’s eye, yet the youth read in it</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unrestrained passions, the obdurate soul</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bold in all evil daring; and it taught,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By Nature’s irresistible instinct, doubt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Well timed and wary. Of himself assured,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fearless of man, and confident in faith,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Lead on!” cried Thalaba.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mohareb led the way;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And through the ruined streets,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And through the farther gate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They past in silence on.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>What sound is borne on the wind?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is it the storm that shakes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The thousand oaks of the forest?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But Thalaba’s long locks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flow down his shoulders moveless, and the wind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In his loose mantle raises not one fold.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is it the river’s roar</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dashed down some rocky descent?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Along the level plain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Euphrates glides unheard.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What sound disturbs the night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Loud as the summer forest in the storm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As the river that roars among rocks?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And what the heavy cloud</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That hangs upon the vale,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thick as the mist o’er a well-watered plain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Settling at evening, when the cooler air</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lets its day-vapours fall;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Black as the sulphur-cloud</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That through Vesuvius, or from Hecla’s mouth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rolls up, ascending from the infernal fires.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>From Ait’s bitumen<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-100" id="noteref-100" epub:type="noteref">100</a> lake</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That heavy cloud ascends;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That everlasting roar</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From where its gushing springs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Boil their black billows up.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Silent the Arab youth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Along the verge of that wide lake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Followed Mohareb’s way</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Towards a ridge of rocks that banked its side.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There from a cave with torrent force,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And everlasting roar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The black bitumen rolled.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The moonlight lay upon the rocks.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their crags were visible,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The shade of jutting cliffs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And where broad lichens whitened some smooth spot,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And where the ivy hung</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its flowing tresses down.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A little way within the cave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The moonlight fell, glossing the sable tide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That gushed tumultuous out.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A little way it entered, then the rock</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Arching its entrance, and the winding way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Darkened the unseen depths.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No eye of mortal man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If unenabled by enchanted spell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had pierced those fearful depths.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For mingling with the roar</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the portentous torrent, oft were heard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shrieks, and wild yells that scared</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The brooding Eagle from her midnight nest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The affrighted countrymen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Call it the Mouth of Hell;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And ever when their way leads near</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They hurry with averted eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And dropping their beads<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-101" id="noteref-101" epub:type="noteref">101</a> fast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pronounce the holy name.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>There pausing at the cavern mouth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mohareb turned to Thalaba,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Now darest thou enter in?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Behold!” the youth replied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And leading in his turn the dangerous way</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Set foot within the cave.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Stay Madman!” cried his comrade. “Wouldst thou rush</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Headlong to certain death?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where are thine arms to meet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Guardian of the Passage?” a loud shriek</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That shook along the windings of the cave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Scattered the youth’s reply.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Mohareb when the long reechoing ceased</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Exclaimed, “Fate favoured thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Young Arab! when she wrote<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-102" id="noteref-102" epub:type="noteref">102</a> upon thy brow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The meeting of to-night;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Else surely had thy name</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This hour been blotted from the Book of Life!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So saying from beneath</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His cloak a bag he drew;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Young Arab! thou art brave,” he cried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“But thus to rush on danger unprepared,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As lions spring upon the hunter’s spear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is blind, brute courage. Zohak<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-103" id="noteref-103" epub:type="noteref">103</a> keeps the cave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Giantly tyrant of primeval days.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Force cannot win the passage.” Thus he said</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And from his wallet drew a human hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shrivelled, and dry, and black,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And fitting as he spake</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A taper in its hold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pursued: “a murderer on the stake had died,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I drove the Vulture from his limbs, and lopt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hand that did the murder, and drew up</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The tendon-strings to close its grasp,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in the sun and wind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Parched it, nine weeks exposed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Taper,⁠ ⁠… but not here the place to impart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor hast thou done the rites,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That fit thee to partake the mystery.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Look! it burns clear, but with the air around</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its dead ingredients mingle deathiness.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This when the Keeper of the Cave shall feel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Maugre the doom of Heaven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The salutary<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-104" id="noteref-104" epub:type="noteref">104</a> spell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall lull his penal agony to sleep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And leave the passage free.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thalaba answered not.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor was there time for answer now,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For lo! Mohareb leads,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And o’er the vaulted cave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Trembles the accursed taper’s feeble light.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There where the narrowing chasm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rose loftier in the hill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stood Zohak, wretched man, condemned to keep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His Cave of punishment.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His was the frequent scream</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which far away the prowling Chacal heard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And howled in terror back:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For from his shoulders grew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Two snakes of monster size,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That ever at his head</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aimed eager their keen teeth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To satiate raving hunger with his brain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He in the eternal conflict oft would seize</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their swelling necks, and in his giant grasp</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bruise them, and rend their flesh with bloody nails,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And howl for agony,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Feeling the pangs he gave, for of himself</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Inseparable parts, his torturers grew.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>To him approaching now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mohareb held the withered arm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Taper of enchanted power.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The unhallowed spell in hand unholy held</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now ministered to mercy, heavily</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wretche’s eyelids closed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And welcome and unfelt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like the release of death</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A sudden sleep fell on his vital powers.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Yet though along the cave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lay Zohak’s giant limbs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The twin-born serpents kept the narrow pass,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Kindled their fiery eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Darted their tongues of terror, and rolled out</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their undulating length,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like the long streamers of some gallant ship</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Buoyed on the wavy air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still struggling to flow on and still withheld.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The scent of living flesh</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Inflamed their appetite.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Prepared for all the perils of the cave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mohareb came. He from his wallet drew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Two human heads yet warm.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O hard of heart! whom not the visible power</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of retributive Justice, and the doom</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Zohak in his sight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deterred from equal crime!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Two human heads, yet warm, he laid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before the scaly guardians of the pass.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They to their wonted banquet of old years</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Turned eager, and the narrow pass was free.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And now before their path</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The opening cave dilates;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They reach a spacious vault</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where the black river fountains burst their way.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now as a whirlwind’s force</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had centered on the spring,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The gushing flood rolled up;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now the deadened roar</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Echoed beneath them, as its sudden pause</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Left wide a dark abyss,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Adown whose fathomless gulfs the eye was lost.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blue flames that hovered o’er the springs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flung through the Cavern their uncertain light</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now waving on the waves they lay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now their fiery curls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flowed in long tresses up,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now contracting glowed with whiter heat.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then up they poured again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Darting pale flashes through the tremulous air;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The flames, the red and yellow sulphur-smoke,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the black darkness of the vault</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Commingling indivisibly.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Here,” quoth Mohareb, “do the Angels dwell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Teachers of Enchantment.” Thalaba</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then raised his voice and cried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Haruth and Maruth, hear me! not with rites</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Accursed, to disturb your penitence</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And learn forbidden lore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Repentant Angels, seek I your abode.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Me Allah and the Prophet mission here,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their chosen servant I.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Tell me the Talisman.”⁠ ⁠…</span>
					<span>“And dost thou think”</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mohareb cried, as with a scornful smile</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He glanced upon his comrade, “dost thou think</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To trick them of their secret? for the dupes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of human-kind keep this lip-righteousness!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Twill serve thee in the Mosque</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in the Market-place,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But Spirits view the heart.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Only by strong and torturing spells enforced,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Those stubborn Angels teach the charm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By which we must descend.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Descend!” said Thalaba.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But then the wrinkling smile</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forsook Mohareb’s cheek,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And darker feelings settled on his brow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Now by my soul,” quoth he, “and I believe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Idiot! that I have led</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some camel-kneed prayer-monger through the cave!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What brings thee hither? thou shouldest have a hut</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By some Saint’s<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-105" id="noteref-105" epub:type="noteref">105</a> grave beside the public way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There to less-knowing fools</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Retail thy Koran<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-106" id="noteref-106" epub:type="noteref">106</a> scraps,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in thy turn, die civet-like at last</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the dung-perfume of thy sanctity!⁠ ⁠…</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ye whom I seek! that, led by me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Feet uninitiate tread</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Your threshold, this atones!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fit sacrifice he falls!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And forth he flashed his scymetar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And raised the murderous blow.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then ceased his power; his lifted arm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Suspended by the spell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hung impotent to strike.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Poor Hypocrite!” cried he,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“And this then is thy faith</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In Allah and the Prophet! they had failed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To save thee, but for Magic’s stolen aid;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yea, they had left thee yonder Serpent’s meal,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But that, in prudent cowardice,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The chosen Servant of the Lord came in,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Safe follower of my path!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Blasphemer! dost thou boast of guiding me?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Kindling with pride quoth Thalaba,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Blindly the wicked work</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The righteous will of Heaven.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sayest thou that diffident of God,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In magic spell I trust?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Liar! let witness this!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he drew off Abdaldar’s Ring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And cast it in the gulf.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A skinny hand came up</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And caught it as it fell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And peals of devilish laughter shook the Cave.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then joy suffused Mohareb’s cheek,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Thalaba beheld</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The blue blade gleam, descending to destroy.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The undefended youth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sprung forward, and he seized</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mohareb in his grasp,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And grappled with him breast to breast.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sinewy and large of limb Mohareb was,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Broad-shouldered, and his joints</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Knit firm, and in the strife</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of danger practised well.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Time had not thus matured young Thalaba:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But now the enthusiast mind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The inspiration of his soul</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Poured vigour like the strength</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of madness through his frame.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mohareb reels before him! he right on</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With knee, with breast, with arm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Presses the staggering foe!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now upon the brink</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of that tremendous spring,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There with fresh impulse and a rush of force</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He thrust him from his hold.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The upwhirling flood received</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mohareb, then, absorbed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Engulphed him in the abyss.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thalaba’s breath came fast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And panting he breathed out</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A broken prayer of thankfulness.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At length he spake and said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Haruth and Maruth! are ye here?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or has that evil guide misled my search?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I, Thalaba, the Servant of the Lord,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Invoke you. Hear me Angels! so may Heaven</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Accept and mitigate your penitence.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I go to root from earth the Sorcerer brood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tell me the needful Talisman!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thus as he spake, recumbent on the rock</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beyond the black abyss,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their forms grew visible.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A settled sorrow sat upon their brows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sorrow alone, for trace of guilt and shame</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No more remained; and gradual as by prayer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sin was purged away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their robe<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-107" id="noteref-107" epub:type="noteref">107</a> of glory, purified of stain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Resumed the lustre of its native light.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>In awe the youth received the answering voice,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Son of Hodeirah! thou hast proved it here;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Talisman is Faith.”</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
