<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Book I</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="book-1" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Book</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</span>
				</h2>
				<blockquote epub:type="epigraph z3998:verse">
					<p>
						<span>… Worse and worse, young Orphane, be thy payne,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>If thou due vengeance doe forbeare,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Till guiltie blood her guerdon do obtayne</span>
					</p>
					<cite><i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Faerie Queene</i>, <abbr>B.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> <abbr>Can.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span></cite>
				</blockquote>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span>How beautiful is night!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A dewy freshness fills the silent air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No mist obscures, no little cloud</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Breaks the whole serene of heaven:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In full-orbed glory the majestic moon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rolls thro the dark blue depths.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beneath her steady ray</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The desert circle spreads,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like the round ocean, girdled with the sky.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How beautiful is night!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Who at this untimely hour</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wanders o’er the desert sands?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No station is in view,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No palm-grove islanded amid the waste.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mother and her child,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The widow and the orphan at this hour</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wander o’er the desert sands.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Alas! the setting sun</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Saw Zeinab in her bliss,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hodeirah’s wife beloved.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alas! the wife beloved,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fruitful mother late,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whom when the daughters of Arabia named</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They wished their lot like her’s;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She wanders o’er the desert sands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A wretched widow now,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fruitful mother of so fair a race,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With only one preserved,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She wanders o’er the wilderness.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>No tear relieved the burthen of her heart;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stunned with the heavy woe she felt like one</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Half-wakened from a midnight dream of blood.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But sometimes when her boy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would wet her hand with tears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And looking up to her fixed countenance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Amid his bursting sobs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Say the dear name of <strong>Mother</strong>, then would she</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Utter a feeble groan.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At length collecting, Zeinab turned her eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To heaven, exclaiming, “Praised be the Lord!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He gave,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a> he takes away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Lord our God is good!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Good is he?” cried the boy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Why are my brethren and my sisters slain?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why is my father killed?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did ever we neglect our prayers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or ever lift a hand unclean to heaven?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did ever stranger from our tent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unwelcomed turn away?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mother, he is not good!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then Zeinab beat her breast in agony,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“O God forgive my child!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He knows not what he says!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou know’st I did not teach him thoughts like these,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O Prophet, pardon him!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She had not wept till that assuaging prayer⁠ ⁠…</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fountains of her eyes were opened then,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And tears relieved her heart.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She raised her swimming eyes to Heaven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Allah, thy will be done!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beneath the dispensation of thy wrath</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I groan, but murmur not.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Day of the Trial will come,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When I shall understand how profitable</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It is to suffer now.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Young Thalaba in silence heard reproof,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His brow in manly frowns was knit,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With manly thoughts his heart was full.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Tell me who slew my father?” cried the boy.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Zeinab replied and said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I knew not that there lived thy father’s foe.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The blessings of the poor for him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Went daily up to Heaven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In distant lands the traveller told his praise.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I did not think there lived</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hodeirah’s enemy.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“But I will hunt him thro’ the earth!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Young Thalaba exclaimed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Already I can bend my father’s bow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Soon will my arm have strength</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To drive the arrow-feathers to his heart.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Zeinab replied, “O Thalaba, my child,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou lookest on to distant days,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And we are in the desert far from men!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Not till that moment her afflicted heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had leisure for the thought.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She cast her eyes around,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alas! no tents were there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beside the bending sands;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No palm tree rose to spot the wilderness.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The dark blue sky closed round</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And rested<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2" id="noteref-2" epub:type="noteref">2</a> like a dome</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the circling waste.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She cast her eyes around,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Famine and Thirst were there⁠ ⁠…</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then the mother bowed her head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wept upon her child.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>… Sudden a cry of wonder</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Thalaba aroused her,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She raised her head, and saw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where high in air a stately palace rose.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Amid a grove embowered</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stood the prodigious pile,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Trees of such ancient majesty</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Towered not on Yemen’s happy hills,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor crowned the stately brow of Lebanon.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fabric so vast, so lavishly enriched,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For Idol, or for Tyrant, never yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Raised the slave race of men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In Rome, nor in the elder Babylon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor old Persepolis,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor where the family of Greece</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hymned Eleutherian Jove.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here studding azure<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3" id="noteref-3" epub:type="noteref">3</a> tablatures</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And rayed with feeble light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Star-like the ruby and the diamond shone:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here on the golden towers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The yellow moon-beam lay;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here with white splendour floods the silver wall.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Less wonderous pile and less magnificent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sennamar<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4" id="noteref-4" epub:type="noteref">4</a> built at Hirah, tho’ his art</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sealed with one stone the ample edifice</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And made its colours, like the serpents skin</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Play with a changeful beauty: him, its Lord</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Jealous lest after-effort might surpass</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The now unequalled palace, from its height</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dashed on the pavement down.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>They entered, and through aromatic paths</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wondering they went along.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At length upon a mossy bank</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beneath a tall mimosa’s shade</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That o’er him bent its living canopy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They saw a man reclined.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Young he appeared, for on his cheek there shone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The morning glow of health,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the brown beard curled close around his chin.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He slept, but at the sound</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of coming feet awakening, fixed his eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In wonder, on the wanderer and her child.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Forgive us,” Zeinab cried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Distress hath made us bold.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Relieve the widow and the fatherless.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blessed are they who succour the distrest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For them hath God appointed Paradise.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He heard, and he looked up to heaven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And tears ran down his cheeks:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“It is a human voice!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I thank thee, O my God!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How many an age has past</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since the sweet sounds have visited mine ear!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I thank thee, O my God,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It is a human voice!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>To Zeinab turning then he cried</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“O mortal who art thou</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose gifted eyes have pierced</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The shadow of concealment that hath wrapt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These bowers, so many an age,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From eye of mortal man?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For countless years have past</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And never foot of man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bowers of Irem trod.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Save only I, a miserable wretch</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Heaven and Earth shut out!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Fearless, and scarce surprized,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For grief in Zeinab’s soul</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All other feebler feelings overpowered,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She answered, “Yesterday</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I was a wife beloved,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fruitful mother of a numerous race.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I am a widow now,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of all my offspring this alone is left.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Praise to the Lord our God,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He gave, he takes away!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then said the stranger, “Not by Heaven unseen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor with unguided feet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy steps have reached this secret place</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor for light purpose is the Veil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That from the Universe hath long shut out</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These ancient bowers, withdrawn.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hear thou my words, O mortal, in thy heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Treasure the wonders I shall tell;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when amid the world</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou shall emerge again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Repeat the warning tale.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why have the Fathers suffered, but to make</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Children wisely safe?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“The Paradise of Irem<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5" id="noteref-5" epub:type="noteref">5</a> this,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And that the palace pile</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which Shedad built, the King.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alas! in the days of my youth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hum of the populous world</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was heard in yon wilderness waste!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er all the winding sands<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-6" id="noteref-6" epub:type="noteref">6</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>The tents of Ad were pitch’d;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Happy Al-Ahkaf then,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For many and brave were her sons,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her daughters were many and fair.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“My name was Aswad then⁠ ⁠…</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alas! alas! how strange</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sound so long unheard!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of noble race I came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One of the wealthy of the earth my Sire.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An hundred horses in my father’s stalls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stood ready for his will;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Numerous his robes of silk,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The number of his camels was not known.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These were my heritance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O God! thy gifts were these;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But better had it been for Aswad’s soul</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To have asked alms on earth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And begged the crumbs that from his table fell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So he had known thy word.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Boy who hast reached this solitude,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fear the Lord in the days of thy youth!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My knee was never taught</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To bend before my God,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My voice was never taught</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To shape one holy prayer.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We worshipped Idols, wood and stone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The work of our own foolish hands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We worshipped in our foolishness.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Vainly the Prophet’s voice</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its frequent warning raised,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘<strong>Repent, and be forgiven!</strong>’⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We mocked the messenger of God,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We mocked the Lord, long-suffering, slow to wrath.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“A mighty work the pride of Shedad planned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here in the wilderness to form</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A garden more surpassing fair</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than that before whose gate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The lightning of the Cherub’s fiery sword</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Waves wide to bar access</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since Adam, the transgressor, thence was driven.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here too would Shedad build</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A kingly pile sublime,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The palace of his pride.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For this exhausted mines</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Supplied their golden store,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For this the central caverns gave their gems;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For this the woodman’s axe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Opened the cedar forest to the sun;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The silkworm of the East</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spun her sepulchral egg;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hunter African</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Provoked the danger of the elephant’s wrath;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Ethiop, keen of scent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Detects the ebony,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-7" id="noteref-7" epub:type="noteref">7</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>That deep-inearthed, and hating light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A leafless tree and barren of all fruit,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With darkness feeds her boughs of raven grain.⁠ ⁠…</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such were the treasures lavished in yon pile;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ages have past away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And never mortal eye</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gazed on their vanity.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“The garden’s copious springs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blest that delightful spot,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And every flower was planted here</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That makes the gale of evening sweet.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He spake, and bade the full-grown forest rise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His own creation; should the King</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wait for slow Nature’s work?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All trees that bend with luscious fruit,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or wave with feathery boughs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or point their spiring heads to heaven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or spreading wide their shadowy arms</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Invite the traveller to repose at noon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hither, uprooted with their native soil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The labour and the pain of multitudes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mature in beauty, bore them.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here, frequent in the walks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The marble statue stood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of heroes and of chiefs.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The trees and flowers remain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By Nature’s care perpetuate and self-sown.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The marble statues long have lost all trace</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of heroes and of chiefs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Huge shapeless stones they lie</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er-grown with many a flower.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“The work of pride went on⁠ ⁠…</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Often the Prophet’s voice</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Denounced impending woe⁠ ⁠…</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We mocked at the words of the Seer.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We mocked at the wrath of the Lord.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A long continued drought first troubled us,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Three years no cloud had formed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Three years no rain had fallen.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wholesome herb was dry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The corn matured not for the food of man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wells and fountains failed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O hard of heart, in whom the punishment</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Awoke no sense of guilt!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Headstrong to ruin, obstinately blind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Idols<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-8" id="noteref-8" epub:type="noteref">8</a> we applied for aid;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sakia we invoked for rain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We called on Razeka for food.⁠ ⁠…</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They did not hear our prayers, they could not hear!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No cloud appeared in Heaven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No nightly dews came down.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Then to the place of concourse,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-9" id="noteref-9" epub:type="noteref">9</a> messengers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were sent to Mecca, where the nations came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Round the Red Hillock, kneeling, to implore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>God in his favoured place,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We sent to call on God;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ah fools! unthinking that from all the earth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The heart ascends to him.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We sent to call on God;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ah fools! to think the Lord</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would hear their prayers abroad</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who made no prayers at home!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Meantime the work of pride went on,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And still before our Idols, wood and stone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We bowed the impious knee.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Turn men of Ad, and call upon the Lord,’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Prophet Houd exclaimed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Turn men of Ad and look to Heaven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And fly the wrath to come.’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We mocked the Prophet’s words;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Now dost thou dream old man.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or art thou drunk with wine?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Future woe and wrath to come,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still thy prudent voice forebodes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When it comes will we believe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till it comes will we go on</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the way our fathers went.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now are thy words from God?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or dost thou dream, old man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or art thou drunk with wine?’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“So spake the stubborn race</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The unbelieving ones,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I too of stubborn unbelieving heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heard him and heeded not.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It chanced my father went the way of man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He perished in his sins.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The funeral rites were duly paid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We bound a camel to his grave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And left it there to die,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So if the resurrection<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-10" id="noteref-10" epub:type="noteref">10</a> came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Together they might rise.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I past my father’s grave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I heard the Camel moan.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She was his favourite beast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One that carried me in infancy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The first that by myself I learnt to mount.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her limbs were lean with famine, and her eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Looked ghastlily with want.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She knew me as I past,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She stared<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-11" id="noteref-11" epub:type="noteref">11</a> me in the face,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My heart was touched, had it been human else?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I thought no eye was near, and broke her bonds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And drove her forth to liberty and life.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Prophet Houd beheld,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He lifted up his voice,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Blessed art thou, young man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blessed art thou, O Aswad, for the deed!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the day of visitation,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the fearful hour of judgment,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>God will remember thee!’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“The day of visitation was at hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fearful hour of judgment hastened on.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lo Shedad’s mighty pile complete,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The palace of his pride.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would ye behold its wonders, enter in!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I have no heart to visit it!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Time hath not harmed the eternal monument,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Time is not here, nor days, nor months, nor years,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An everlasting <strong>now</strong> of misery!⁠ ⁠…</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ye must have heard their fame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or likely ye have seen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mighty Pyramids,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For sure those mighty piles shall overlive</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The feeble generations of mankind.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What tho’ unmoved they bore<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-12" id="noteref-12" epub:type="noteref">12</a> the deluge weight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Survivors of the ruined world?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What tho’ their founder filled with miracles</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wealth miraculous their ample vaults?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Compared with yonder fabric, and they shrink</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The baby wonders of a woman’s work!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her emerald columns o’er the marble courts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fling their green rays, as when amid a shower</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sun shines loveliest on the vernal corn.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here Shedad bade the sapphire floor be laid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As tho’ with feet divine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To trample azure light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like the blue pavement of the firmament.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here self-suspended hangs in air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As its pure substance loathed material touch,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The living<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-13" id="noteref-13" epub:type="noteref">13</a> carbuncle;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sun of the lofty dome</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Darkness has no dominion o’er its beams;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Intense it glows, an ever-flowing tide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of glory, like the day-flood in its source.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Impious! the Trees of vegetable gold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such as in Eden’s groves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet innocent it<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-14" id="noteref-14" epub:type="noteref">14</a> grew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Impious! he made his boast, tho’ heaven had hidden</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So deep the baneful ore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That they should branch and bud for him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That art should force their blossoms and their fruit,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And re-create for him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whate’er was lost in Paradise.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Therefore at Shedad’s voice</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here towered the palm, a silver trunk,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fine gold net-work<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-15" id="noteref-15" epub:type="noteref">15</a> growing out</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Loose from its rugged boughs.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tall as the Cedar of the mountain, here</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rose the gold branches, hung with emerald leaves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blossomed with pearls, and rich with ruby fruit,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O Ad! my country! evil was the day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That thy unhappy sons</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Crouched at this Nimrod’s throne,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-16" id="noteref-16" epub:type="noteref">16</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>And placed him on the pedestal of power,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And laid their liberties beneath his feet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Robbing their children of the heritance</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their fathers handed down.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What was to him the squandered wealth?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What was to him the burthen of the land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The lavished misery?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He did but speak his will,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And like the blasting Siroc of the East,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ruin of the royal voice</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Found its way every-where.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I marvel not that he, whose power</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No earthly law, no human feeling curbed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mocked at the living God!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“And now the King’s command went forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the people, bidding old and young,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Husband and wife, the master and the slave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All the collected multitudes of Ad,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here to repair, and hold high festival,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That he might see his people, they behold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their King’s magnificence and power.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The day of festival arrived,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hither they came, the old man and the boy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Husband and wife, the master and the slave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hither they came. From yonder high tower top,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The loftiest of the Palace, Shedad looked</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Down on his tribe: their tents on yonder sands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rose like the countless billows of the sea.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their tread and voices like the ocean roar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One deep confusion of tumultuous sounds.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They saw their King’s magnificence; beheld</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His Palace sparkling like the Angel domes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Paradise; his garden like the bowers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of early Eden, and they shouted out</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Great is the King, a God upon the earth!’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Intoxicate with joy and pride</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He heard their blasphemies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in his wantonness of heart he bade</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Prophet Houd be brought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And o’er the marble courts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And o’er the gorgeous rooms</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Glittering with gems and gold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He led the Man of God.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Is not this a stately pile?’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cried the Monarch in his joy.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Hath ever eye beheld,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hath ever thought conceived,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Place more magnificent?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Houd, they saw that Heaven imparted</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To thy lips the words of wisdom!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Look at the riches round</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And value them aright,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If so thy wisdom can.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“The Prophet heard his vaunt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And answered with an aweful smile,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Costly thy palace King!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But only in the hour<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-17" id="noteref-17" epub:type="noteref">17</a> of death</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Man learns to value things like these aright.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘Hast thou a fault to find</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In all thine eyes have seen?’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Again the King exclaimed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Yes!’ said the man of God;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘The walls are weak, the building ill secured.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Azrael can enter in!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Sarsar can pierce thro’,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Icy Wind of Death.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“I was beside the Monarch when he spake⁠ ⁠…</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gentle the Prophet spake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But in his eye there dwelt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A sorrow that disturbed me while I gazed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The countenance of Shedad fell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And anger sate upon his paler lips.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He to the high tower top the Prophet led,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And pointed to the multitude,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And as again they shouted out</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Great is the King! a God upon the Earth!’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Turned with a threatful smile to Houd,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Say they aright, O Prophet? is the King</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Great upon earth, a God among mankind?’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Prophet answered not,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His eye rolled round the infinite multitude,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And into tears he burst.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Sudden an uproar rose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A cry of joy below,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘The Messenger is come!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Kail from Mecca comes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He brings the boon obtained!’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Forth as we went we saw where overhead</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There hung a deep black cloud,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On which the multitude</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With joyful eyes looked up</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And blest the coming rain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Messenger addrest the King</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And told his tale of joy.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘To Mecca I repaired,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the Red Hillock knelt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And called on God for rain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My prayer ascended and was heard;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Three clouds appeared in heaven.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One white, and like the flying cloud of noon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One red as it had drunk the evening beams,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One black and heavy with its load of rain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A voice went forth from heaven</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Chuse Kail of the three!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I thanked the gracious Power,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And chose the black cloud, heavy with its wealth.’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Right! right!’ a thousand tongues exclaimed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all was merriment and joy.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Then stood the Prophet up and cried aloud,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Woe, woe, to Irem! woe to Ad!</span>
				<br/>
				<span><strong>Death</strong> is gone up into her palaces!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Woe! woe! a day of guilt and punishment,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>A day of desolation!’</span>
					<span>As he spake</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His large eye rolled in horror, and so deep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His tone, it seemed some Spirit from within</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Breathed thro’ his moveless lips<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-18" id="noteref-18" epub:type="noteref">18</a> the unearthly voice.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All looks were turned to him. ‘O Ad!’ he cried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Dear native land, by all rememberances</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of childhood, by all joys of manhood dear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O Vale of many Waters! morn and night</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My age must groan for you, and to the grave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Go down in sorrow. Thou wilt give thy fruits,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But who shall gather them? thy grapes will ripen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But who shall tread the wine-press? Fly the wrath,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ye who would live and save your souls alive!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For strong is his right hand that bends the Bow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Arrows that he shoots are sharp,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And err not from their aim!’<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-19" id="noteref-19" epub:type="noteref">19</a></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“With that, a faithful few</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Prest thro’ the throng to join him. Then arose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mockery and mirth; ‘Go bald head!’ and they mixed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Curses with laughter. He set forth, yet once</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Looked back⁠—his eye fell on me, and he called</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Aswad!’⁠ ⁠… it startled me,⁠ ⁠… it terrified,⁠ ⁠…</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Aswad!’ again he called,⁠ ⁠… and I almost</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had followed him. O moment fled too soon!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O moment irrecoverably lost!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The shouts of mockery made a coward of me;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He went, and I remained, in fear of <strong>Man</strong>!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“He went, and darker grew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The deepening cloud above.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At length it opened, and.⁠ ⁠… O God! O God!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There were no waters there!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There fell no kindly rain!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Sarsar from its womb went forth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Icy Wind of Death.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“They fell around me, thousands fell around,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The King and all his People fell.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All! all! they perished all!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I⁠ ⁠… only I⁠ ⁠… was left.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There came a Voice to me and said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘In the Day of Visitation,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the fearful Hour of Judgement,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>God hath remembered thee.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“When from an agony of prayer I rose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And from the scene of death</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Attempted to go forth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The way was open, I beheld</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No barrier to my steps.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But round these bowers the Arm of God</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had drawn a mighty chain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A barrier that no human force might break.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Twice I essayed to pass.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With that the voice was heard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘O Aswad be content, and bless the Lord!’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘One righteous deed hath saved</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy soul from utter death.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O Aswad, sinful man!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When by long penitence</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou feelest thy soul prepared,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Breathe up the wish to die,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Azrael comes, obedient to the prayer.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“A miserable man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Earth and Heaven shut out,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I heard the dreadful voice.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I looked around my prison place,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bodies of the dead were there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where’er I looked they lay.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They mouldered, mouldered here,⁠ ⁠…</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their very bones have crumbled into dust,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So many years have past!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So many weary ages have gone by!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And still I linger here!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still groaning with the burthen of my sins</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have never dared to breathe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The prayer to be released.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Oh! who can tell the unspeakable misery</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of solitude like this!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No sound hath ever reached my ear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Save of the passing wind⁠ ⁠…</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fountain’s everlasting flow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The forest in the gale,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The pattering of the shower,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sounds dead and mournful all.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No bird hath ever closed her wing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon these solitary bowers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No insect sweetly buzzed amid these groves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From all things that have life,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Save only me, concealed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This Tree alone that o’er my head</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hangs, down its hospitable boughs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bends its whispering leaves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As tho’ to welcome me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seems to partake<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-20" id="noteref-20" epub:type="noteref">20</a> of life;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I love it as my friend, my only friend!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“I know not for what ages I have dragged</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This miserable life,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How often I have seen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These antient trees renewed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What countless generations of mankind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have risen and fallen asleep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I remain the same!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My garment hath not waxed old,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor the sole of my shoe hath worn.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“I dare not breathe the prayer to die,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O merciful Lord God!⁠ ⁠…</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But when it is thy will,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But when I have atoned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For mine iniquities,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sufferings have made pure</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My soul with sin defiled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Release me in thine own good time,⁠ ⁠…</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I will not cease to praise thee, O my God!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Silence ensued awhile,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then Zeinab answered him.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Blessed art thou, O Aswad! for the Lord</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who saved thy soul from Hell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will call thee to him in his own good time.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And would that when my heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Breathed up the wish to die,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Azrael might visit me!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then would I follow where my babes are gone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And join Hodeirah now!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She ceased, and the rushing of wings</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was heard in the stillness of night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Azrael, the Death-Angel stood before them.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His countenance was dark,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Solemn, but not severe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It awed but struck no terror to the heart.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Zeinab, thy wish is heard!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aswad, thy hour is come!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They fell upon the ground and blest the voice,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Azrael from his sword</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let drop<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-21" id="noteref-21" epub:type="noteref">21</a> the drops of bitterness and death.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Me too! me too!” young Thalaba exclaimed:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As wild with grief he kissed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His Mother’s livid hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His Mother’s quivering lips,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“O Angel! take me too!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Son of Hodeirah!” the Death-Angel cried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“It is not yet the hour.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Son of Hodeirah, thou art chosen forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To do the will of Heaven;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To avenge thy Father’s death,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The murder of thy race,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To work the mightiest enterprise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That mortal man hath wrought.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Live! and remember Destiny</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hath marked thee from mankind!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He ceased, and he was gone.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Young Thalaba looked round,⁠ ⁠…</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Palace and the groves were seen no more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He stood amid the Wilderness, alone.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
