<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Book VI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="book-6" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<h2>
				<span epub:type="label">Book</span>
				<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</span>
			</h2>
			<p>
				<span>So from the inmost cavern, Thalaba</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Retrod the windings of the rock.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still on the ground the giant limbs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Zohak were outstretched;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The spell of sleep had ceased</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And his broad eyes were glaring on the youth:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet raised he not his arm to bar the way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fearful to rouse the snakes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now lingering o’er their meal.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Oh then, emerging from that dreadful cave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How grateful did the gale of night</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Salute his freshened sense!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How full of lightsome joy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thankful to Heaven, he hastens by the verge</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of that bitumen lake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose black and heavy fumes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Surge heaving after surge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rolled like the billowy and tumultuous sea.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The song of many a bird at morn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aroused him from his rest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lo! by his side a courser stood!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>More animate of eye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of form more faultless never had he seen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>More light of limbs and beautiful in strength,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the race whose blood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pure and unmingled, from the royal steeds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-108" id="noteref-108" epub:type="noteref">108</a> Solomon came down.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The chosen Arab’s eye</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Glanced o’er his graceful shape,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His rich caparisons,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His crimson trappings gay.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But when he saw the mouth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Uncurbed, the unbridled neck,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then flushed his cheek, and leapt his heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For sure he deemed that Heaven had sent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Courser, whom no erring hand should guide.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lo! the eager Steed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Throws his head and paws the ground,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Impatient of delay!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then up leapt Thalaba</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And away went the self-governed steed.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Far over the plain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Away went the bridleless steed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the dew of the morning his fetlocks were wet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The foam frothed his limbs in the journey of noon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor stayed he till over the westerly heaven</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The shadows of evening had spread.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then on a sheltered bank</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The appointed Youth reposed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And by him laid the docile courser down.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Again in the grey of the morning</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thalaba bounded up,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Over hill, over dale</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Away goes the bridleless steed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Again at eve he stops</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Again the Youth descends.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His load discharged, his errand done,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then bounded the courser away.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Heavy and dark the eve;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Moon was hid on high,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A dim light only tinged the mist</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That crost her in the path of Heaven.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All living sounds had ceased,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Only the flow of waters near was heard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A low and lulling melody.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fasting, yet not of want</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Percipient, he on that mysterious steed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had reached his resting place,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For expectation kept his nature up.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The flow of waters now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Awoke a feverish thirst:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Led by the sound, he moved</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To seek the grateful wave.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A meteor in the hazy air</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Played before his path;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before him now it rolled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A globe of livid fire;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now contracted to a steady light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As when the solitary hermit prunes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His lamp’s long undulating flame:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now its wavy point</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Up-blazing rose, like a young cypress-tree</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swayed by the heavy wind;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Anon to Thalaba it moved,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wrapped him in its pale innocuous fire:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now in the darkness drowned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Left him with eyes bedimmed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now emerging<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-109" id="noteref-109" epub:type="noteref">109</a> spread the scene to sight.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Led by the sound, and meteor-flame</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Advanced the Arab youth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now to the nearest of the many rills</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He stoops; ascending steam</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Timely repels his hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For from its source it sprung, a boiling tide.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A second course with better hap he tries,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wave intensly cold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tempts to a copious draught.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There was a virtue in the wave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His limbs that stiff with toil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dragged heavy, from the copious draught received</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lightness and supple strength.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’erjoyed, and deeming the benignant Power</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who sent the reinless steed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had blessed the healing waters to his use</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He laid him down to sleep;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lulled by the soothing and incessant sound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The flow of many waters, blending oft</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With shriller tones and deep low murmurings</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That from the fountain caves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In mingled melody</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like faery music, heard at midnight, came.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The sounds that last he heard at night</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Awoke his sense at morn.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A scene of wonders lay before his eyes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In mazy windings o’er the vale</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wandered a thousand streams;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They in their endless flow<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-110" id="noteref-110" epub:type="noteref">110</a> had channelled deep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rocky soil o’er which they ran,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Veining its thousand islet stones,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like clouds that freckle o’er the summer sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The blue etherial ocean circling each</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And insulating all.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A thousand shapes they wore, those islet stones,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Nature with her various tints</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Varied anew their thousand forms:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For some were green with moss,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some rich with yellow lichen’s gold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or ruddier tinged, or grey, or silver-white,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or sparkling sparry radiance to the sun.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here gushed the fountains up,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alternate light and blackness, like the play</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of sunbeams, on the warrior’s burnished arms.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yonder the river rolled, whose bed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their labyrinthine lingerings o’er</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Received the confluent rills.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>This was a wild and wonderous scene,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strange and beautiful, as where</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By Oton-tala, like a sea<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-111" id="noteref-111" epub:type="noteref">111</a> of stars,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hundred sources of Hoangho burst.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>High mountains closed the vale,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bare rocky mountains, to all living things</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Inhospitable, on whose sides no herb</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rooted, no insect fed, no bird awoke</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their echoes, save the Eagle, strong of wing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A lonely plunderer, that afar</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sought in the vales his prey.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thither towards those mountains, Thalaba</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Advanced, for well he weened that there had Fate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Destined the adventures end.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Up a wide vale winding amid their depths,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A stony vale between receding heights</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of stone, he wound his way.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A cheerless place! the solitary Bee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose buzzing was the only sound of life</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flew there on restless wing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seeking in vain one blossom, where to fix.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Still Thalaba holds on,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The winding vale now narrows on his way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And steeper of ascent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rightward and leftward rise the rocks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now they meet across the vale.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was it the toil of human hands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That hewed a passage in the rock,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thro’ whose rude portal-way</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The light of heaven was seen?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rude and low the portal-way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beyond the same<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-112" id="noteref-112" epub:type="noteref">112</a> ascending straits</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Went winding up the wilds.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Still a bare, silent, solitary glen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A fearful silence and a solitude</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That made itself be felt.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And steeper now the ascent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A rugged path, that tired</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The straining muscles, toiling slowly up.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At length again a rock</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stretched o’er the narrow vale.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There also was a portal hewn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But gates of massy iron barred the way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Huge, solid, heavy-hinged.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>There hung a horn beside the gate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ivory-tipt and brazen mouthed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He took the ivory tip,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thro’ the brazen mouth he breathed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From rock to rock rebounding rung the blast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like a long thunder peal!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The gates of iron, by no human arm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unfolded, turning on their hinges slow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Disclosed the passage of the rock.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He entered, and the iron gates</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fell to, and closed him in.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It was a narrow winding way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dim lamps suspended from the vault</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lent to the gloom an agitated light.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Winding it pierced the rock,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A long descending path</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By gates of iron closed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There also hung the horn beside</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of ivory tip and brazen mouth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Again he took the ivory tip</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And gave the brazen mouth his voice again.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not now in thunder spake the horn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But poured a sweet and thrilling melody:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The gates flew open, and a flood of light</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rushed on his dazzled eyes.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Was it to earthly Eden lost so long,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The youth had found the wonderous way?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But earthly Eden boasts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No terraced palaces,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No rich pavilions bright with woven<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-113" id="noteref-113" epub:type="noteref">113</a> gold.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like these that in the vale</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rise amid odorous groves.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The astonished Thalaba</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Doubting as tho’ an unsubstantial dream</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beguiled his passive sense,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A moment closed his eyes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still they were there⁠ ⁠… the palaces and groves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And rich pavilions glittering golden light.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And lo! a man, reverend in comely age</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Advancing meets the youth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Favoured of Fortune,” he exclaimed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Go taste the joys of Paradise!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“The reinless steed that ranges o’er the world</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Brings hither those alone for lofty deeds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Marked by their horoscope; permitted here</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“A foretaste of the full beatitude,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“That in heroic acts they may go on</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“More ardent, eager to return and reap</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Endless enjoyment here, their destined meed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Favoured of Fortune thou,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Go taste the joys of Paradise!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>This said, he turned away, and left</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Youth in wonder mute;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For Thalaba stood mute</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And passively received</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mingled joy that flowed on every sense.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where’er his eye could reach</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fair structures, rain bow-hued, arose;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And rich pavilions thro’ the opening woods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gleamed from their waving curtains sunny gold;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And winding thro’ the verdant vale</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flowed streams of liquid light;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And fluted cypresses reared up</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their living obelisks;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And broad-leaved<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-114" id="noteref-114" epub:type="noteref">114</a> Zennars in long colonades</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er-arched delightful walks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where round their trunks the thousand-tendril’d vine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wound up and hung the bows with greener wreaths,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And clusters not their own.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wearied with endless beauty did his eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Return for rest? beside him teems the earth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With tulips, like the ruddy<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-115" id="noteref-115" epub:type="noteref">115</a> evening streaked,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And here the lily hangs her head of snow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And here amid her sable<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-116" id="noteref-116" epub:type="noteref">116</a> cup</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shines the red eye-spot, like one brightest star</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The solitary twinkler of the night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And here the rose expands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her paradise<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-117" id="noteref-117" epub:type="noteref">117</a> of leaves.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then on his ear what sounds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of harmony arose!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far music and the distance-mellowed song</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From bowers of merriment;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The waterfall remote;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The murmuring of the leafy groves;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The single nightingale</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Perched in the Rosier by, so richly toned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That never from that most melodious bird,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Singing a love-song to his brooding mate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did Thracian shepherd by the grave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Orpheus<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-118" id="noteref-118" epub:type="noteref">118</a> hear a sweeter song;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tho’ there the Spirit of the Sepulchre</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All his own power infuse, to swell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The incense that he loves.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And oh! what odours the voluptuous vale</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Scatters from jasmine bowers.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From yon rose wilderness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From clustered henna, and from orange groves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That with such perfumes fill the breeze,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As Peris to their Sister bear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When from the summit of some lofty tree</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She hangs encaged, the captive of the Dives.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They from their pinions shake</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sweetness of celestial flowers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And as her enemies impure</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From that impervious poison far away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fly groaning with the torment, she the while</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Inhales her fragrant<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-119" id="noteref-119" epub:type="noteref">119</a> food.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such odours flowed upon the world</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When at Mohammed’s nuptials, word</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Went forth in Heaven to roll</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The everlasting gates of Paradise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Back on their living hinges, that its gales</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Might visit all below; the general bliss</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thrilled every bosom, and the family</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of man, for once<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-120" id="noteref-120" epub:type="noteref">120</a> partook one common joy.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Full of the joy, yet still awake</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To wonder, on went Thalaba;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On every side the song of mirth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The music of festivity,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Invite the passing youth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wearied at length with hunger and with heat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He enters in a banquet room,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where round a fountain brink,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On silken<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-121" id="noteref-121" epub:type="noteref">121</a> carpets sate the festive train.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Instant thro’ all his frame</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Delightful coolness spread;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The playing fount refreshed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The agitated air;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The very light came cooled thro’ silvering panes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of pearly<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-122" id="noteref-122" epub:type="noteref">122</a> shell, like the pale moon-beam tinged;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or where the wine-vase<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-123" id="noteref-123" epub:type="noteref">123</a> filled the aperture,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rosy as rising morn, or softer gleam</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of saffron, like the sunny evening mist:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thro’ every hue, and streaked by all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The flowing fountain played.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Around the water-edge</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Vessels of wine, alternate placed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ruby and amber, tinged its little waves.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From golden goblets there<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-124" id="noteref-124" epub:type="noteref">124</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>The guests sate quaffing the delicious juice</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Shiraz’ golden grape.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But Thalaba took not the draught</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For rightly he knew had the Prophet forbidden</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That beverage the mother<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-125" id="noteref-125" epub:type="noteref">125</a> of sins.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor did the urgent guests</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Proffer a second time the liquid fire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For in the youth’s strong eye they saw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No moveable resolve.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet not uncourteous, Thalaba</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drank the cool draught of innocence,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That fragrant from its dewy<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-126" id="noteref-126" epub:type="noteref">126</a> vase</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Came purer than it left its native bed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he partook the odorous fruits,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For all rich fruits were there.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Water-melons rough of rind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose pulp the thirsty lip</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dissolved into a draught:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pistachios from the heavy-clustered trees</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Malavert, or Haleb’s fertile soil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Casbin’s<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-127" id="noteref-127" epub:type="noteref">127</a> luscious grapes of amber hue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That many a week endure</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The summer sun intense,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till by its powerful fire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All watery particles exhaled, alone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The strong essential sweetness ripens there.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here cased in ice, the<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-128" id="noteref-128" epub:type="noteref">128</a> apricot,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A topaz, crystal-set:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here on a plate of snow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sunny orange rests,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And still the aloes and the sandal-wood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From golden censers o’er the banquet room</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Diffuse their dying sweets.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Anon a troop of females formed the dance</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their ancles bound with<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-129" id="noteref-129" epub:type="noteref">129</a> bracelet-bells</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That made the modulating harmony.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Transparent<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-130" id="noteref-130" epub:type="noteref">130</a> garments to the greedy eye</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gave all their harlot limbs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That writhed, in each immodest gesture skilled.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>With earnest eyes the banqueters</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fed on the sight impure;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Thalaba, he gazed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But in his heart he bore a talisman</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose blessed Alchemy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To virtuous thoughts refined</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The loose suggestions of the scene impure.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Oneiza’s image swam before his sight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His own Arabian Maid.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He rose, and from the banquet room he rushed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And tears ran down his burning cheek,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And nature for a moment woke the thought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And murmured, that from all domestic joys</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Estranged, he wandered o’er the world</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A lonely being, far from all he loved.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Son of Hodeirah, not among thy crimes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That murmur shall be written!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>From tents of revelry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From festal bowers, to solitude he ran,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now he reached where all the rills</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of that well-watered garden in one tide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rolled their collected waves.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A straight and stately bridge</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stretched its long arches o’er the ample stream.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strong in the evening and distinct its shade</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lay on the watry mirror, and his eye</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Saw it united with its parent pile</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One huge fantastic fabric. Drawing near,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Loud from the chambers<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-131" id="noteref-131" epub:type="noteref">131</a> of the bridge below,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sounds of carousal came and song,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And unveiled women bade the advancing youth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come merry-make with them.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unhearing or unheeding, Thalaba</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Past o’er with hurried pace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And plunged amid the forest solitude.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deserts of Araby!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His soul returned to you.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He cast himself upon the earth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And closed his eyes, and called</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The voluntary vision up.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A cry as of distress</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aroused him; loud it came, and near!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He started up, he strung his bow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He plucked the arrow forth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Again a shriek⁠ ⁠… a woman’s shriek!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lo! she rushes thro’ the trees,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her veil all rent, her garments torn!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He follows close, the ravisher.⁠ ⁠…</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even on the unechoing grass</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She hears his tread, so close!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Prophet save me! save me God!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Help! help!” she cried to Thalaba,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thalaba drew the bow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The unerring arrow did its work of death.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He turned him to the woman, and beheld</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His own Oneiza, his Arabian Maid.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
