<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Book VIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="book-8" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Book</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VIII</span>
				</h2>
				<blockquote epub:type="epigraph z3998:verse">
					<p xml:lang="la">
						<span>Quas potius decuit nostro te inferre sepulchro,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Petronilla, tibi spargimus has Jacrimas.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Spargimus has lacrimas moesti monumenta parentis⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Et tibi pro thalamo sternimus hune tumulum.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Sperabam genitor taedas praeferre jugales,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Et titulo patris jungere nomen avi;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Heu! gener est Orcus; quique, O dulcissima! per te</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Se sperabat avum, desinit esse pater.</span>
					</p>
					<cite>Joachim du Bellay</cite>
				</blockquote>
			</header>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Woman</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Go not among the Tombs, Old Man!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There is a madman there.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Old Man</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Will he harm me if I go?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Woman</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Not he, poor miserable man!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But ’tis a wretched sight to see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His utter wretchedness.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For all day long he lies on a grave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And never is he seen to weep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And never is he heard to groan.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor ever at the hour of prayer</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bends his knee, nor moves his lips.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I have taken him food for charity</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And never a word he spake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But yet so ghastly he looked</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That I have awakened at night</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With the dream of his ghastly eyes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now go not among the Tombs, Old Man!</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Old Man</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Wherefore has the wrath of God</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So sorely stricken him?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Woman</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>He came a Stranger to the land,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And did good service to the Sultan,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And well his service was rewarded.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Sultan named him next himself,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And gave a palace for his dwelling,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And dowered his bride with rich domains.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But on his wedding night</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There came the Angel of Death.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Since that hour a man distracted</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Among the sepulchres he wanders.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Sultan when he heard the tale</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Said that for some untold crime</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Judgement thus had stricken him,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And asking Heaven forgiveness</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That he had shown him favour,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Abandoned him to want.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Old Man</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>A Stranger did you say?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Woman</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>An Arab born, like you.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But go not among the Tombs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For the sight of his wretchedness</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Might make a hard heart ache!</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Old Man</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Nay, nay, I never yet have shunned</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A countryman in distress:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the sound of his dear native tongue</span>
					<br/>
					<span>May be like the voice of a friend.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<p>
				<span>Then to the Sepulchre</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Woman pointed out,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Old Moath bent his way.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the tomb lay Thalaba,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the light of the setting eve.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sun, and the wind, and the rain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had rusted his raven locks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His checks were fallen in,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His face bones prominent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the tomb he lay along</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And his lean fingers played,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unwitting, with the grass that grew beside.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The Old man knew him not,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And drawing near him cried</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Countryman, peace be with thee!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sound of his dear native tongue</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Awakened Thalaba.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He raised his countenance</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And saw the good Old Man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he arose, and fell upon his neck,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And groaned in bitterness.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then Moath knew the youth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And feared that he was childless, and he turned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His eyes, and pointed to the tomb.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Old Man!” cried Thalaba,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Thy search is ended there!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The father’s cheek grew white</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And his lip quivered with the misery;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Howbeit, collecting with a painful voice</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He answered, “God is good! his will be done!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The woe in which he spake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The resignation that inspired his speech,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They softened Thalaba.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Thou hast a solace in thy grief,” he cried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“A comforter within!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Moath! thou seest me here,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Delivered to the Evil Powers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A God-abandoned wretch.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The Old Man looked at him incredulous.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Nightly,” the youth pursued,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Thy daughter comes to drive me to despair.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Moath thou thinkest me mad,⁠ ⁠…</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But when the Cryer<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-138" id="noteref-138" epub:type="noteref">138</a> from the Minaret</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Proclaims the midnight hour,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hast thou a heart to see her?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>In the<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-139" id="noteref-139" epub:type="noteref">139</a> Meidan now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The clang of clarions and of drums</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Accompanied the Sun’s descent.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Dost thou not pray? my son!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Said Moath, as he saw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The white flag waving on the neighbouring Mosque;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then Thalaba’s eye grew wild,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Pray!” echoed he, “I must not pray!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the hollow groan he gave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Went to the Old Man’s heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bowing down his face to earth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In fervent agony he called on God.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>A night of darkness and of storms!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into the Chamber<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-140" id="noteref-140" epub:type="noteref">140</a> of the Tomb</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thalaba led the Old Man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To roof him from the rain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A night of storms! the wind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swept through the moonless sky</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And moaned among the pillared sepulchres.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in the pauses of its sweep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They heard the heavy rain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beat on the monument above.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In silence on Oneiza’s grave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Father and the Husband sat.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The Cryer from the Minaret</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Proclaimed the midnight hour;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Now! now!” cried Thalaba,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And o’er the chamber of the tomb</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There spread a lurid gleam</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like the reflection of a sulphur fire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in that hideous light</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Oneiza stood before them, it was She,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her very lineaments, and such as death</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had changed them, livid cheeks, and lips of blue.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But in her eyes there dwelt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brightness more terrible</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than all the loathsomeness of death.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Still art thou living, wretch?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In hollow tones she cried to Thalaba,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“And must I nightly leave my grave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To tell thee, still in vain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>God has abandoned thee?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“This is not she!” the Old Man exclaimed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“A Fiend! a manifest Fiend!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And to the youth he held his lance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Strike and deliver thyself!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Strike <strong>her</strong>!” cried Thalaba,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And palsied of all powers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gazed fixedly upon the dreadful form.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Yea! strike her!” cried a voice whose tones</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flowed with such sudden healing through his soul,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As when the desert shower</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From death delivered him.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But unobedient to that well-known voice</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His eye was seeking it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When Moath firm of heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Performed the bidding; through the vampire<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-141" id="noteref-141" epub:type="noteref">141</a> corpse</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He thrust his lance; it fell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And howling with the wound</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its demon tenant fled.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A sapphire light fell on them,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And garmented with glory, in their sight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Oneiza’s Spirit stood.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O Thalaba!” she cried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Abandon not thyself!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wouldst thou for ever lose me?⁠ ⁠… go, fulfill</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy quest, that in the Bowers of Paradise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In vain I may not wait thee, O my Husband!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Moath then the Spirit</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Turned the dark lustre of her Angel eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Short is thy destined path,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O my dear father! to the abode of bliss.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Return to Araby,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There with the thought of death.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Comfort thy lonely age,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Azrael the Deliverer, soon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall visit thee in peace.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>They stood with earnest eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And arms out-reaching, when again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The darkness closed around them.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The soul of Thalaba revived;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He from the floor the quiver took</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And as he bent the bow, exclaimed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Was it the over-ruling Providence</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That in the hour of frenzy led my hands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Instinctively to this?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To-morrow, and the sun shall brace anew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The slackened cord that now sounds loose and damp,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To-morrow, and its livelier tone will sing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In tort vibration to the arrow’s flight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I⁠ ⁠… but I also, with recovered health</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of heart, shall do my duty.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My Father! here I leave thee then!” he cried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“And not to meet again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till at the gate of Paradise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The eternal union of our joys commence.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We parted last in darkness!”⁠ ⁠… and the youth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thought with what other hopes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But now his heart was calm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For on his soul a heavenly hope had dawned.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Old Man answered nothing, but he held</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His garment and to the door</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the Tomb Chamber followed him.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rain had ceased, the sky was wild</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its black clouds broken by the storm.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lo! it chanced that in the chasm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Heaven between, a star,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leaving along its path continuous light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shot eastward. “See my guide!” quoth Thalaba,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And turning, he received</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Old Moath’s last embrace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And his last blessing.</span>
					<span>It was eve,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When an old Dervise, sitting in the sun</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At his cell door, invited for the night</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The traveller; in the sun</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He spread the plain repast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rice and fresh grapes, and at their feet there flowed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The brook of which they drank.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So as they sat at meal,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With song, with music, and with dance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A wedding train went by;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The veiled bride, the female slaves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The torches of festivity,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And trump and timbrel merriment</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Accompanied their way.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The good old Dervise gave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A blessing as they past.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But Thalaba looked on,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And breathed a low, deep groan, and hid his face.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Dervise had known sorrow; and he felt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Compassion; and his words</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of pity and of piety</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Opened the young man’s heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he told all his tale.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Repine not, O my Son!” the Old Man replied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“That Heaven has chastened thee.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Behold this vine,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-142" id="noteref-142" epub:type="noteref">142</a> I found it a wild tree</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose wanton strength had swoln into</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Irregular twigs, and bold excrescencies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And spent itself in leaves and little rings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the vain flourish of its outwardness</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wasting the sap and strength</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That should have given forth fruit.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But when I pruned the Tree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then it grew temperate in its vain expense</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of useless leaves, and knotted, as thou seest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into these full, clear, clusters, to repay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hand whose foresight wounded it.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Repine not, O my Son!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In wisdom and in mercy Heaven inflicts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like a wise Leech, its painful remedies.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then pausing, “whither goest thou now?” he asked.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I know not,” answered Thalaba,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Straight on, with Destiny my guide.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quoth the Old Man, “I will not blame thy trust,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yet methinks thy feet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should tread with certainty.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In Kaf the Simorg hath his dwelling place,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The all-knowing Bird of Ages, who hath seen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The World, with all her children, thrice destroyed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Long is the thither path,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And difficult the way, of danger full;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But his unerring voice</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Could point to certain end thy weary search.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Easy assent the youth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gave to the words of wisdom; and behold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At dawn, the adventurer on his way to Kaf.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he has travelled many a day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And many a river swum over,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And many a mountain ridge has crost</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And many a measureless plain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now amid the wilds advanced,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Long is it since his eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have seen the trace of man.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Cold! cold! ’tis a chilly clime</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That the toil of the youth has reached,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he is aweary now,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And faint for the lack of food.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cold! cold! there is no Sun in heaven</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But a heavy and uniform cloud</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the snows begin to fall.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dost thou wish for thy deserts, O Son of Hodeirah?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dost thou long for the gales of Arabia?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cold! cold! his blood flows languid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His hands are red, his lips are blue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His feet are sore with the frost.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cheer thee! cheer thee! Thalaba!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A little yet bear up!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>All waste! no sign of life</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the track of the wolf and the bear!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No sound but the wild, wild wind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the snow crunching under his feet!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Night is come; no moon, no stars,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Only the light of the snow!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But behold a fire in the cave of the hill</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A heart-reviving fire;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thither with strength renewed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thalaba presses on.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He found a Woman in the cave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A solitary Woman,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who by the fire was spinning</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And singing as she spun.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The pine boughs they blazed cheerfully</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And her face was bright with the flame.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her face was as a Damsel’s face</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yet her hair was grey.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She bade him welcome with a smile</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And still continued spinning</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And singing as she spun.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The thread the Woman drew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was finer than the silkworm’s,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was finer than the gossamer.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The song she sung was low and sweet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Thalaba knew not the words.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He laid his bow before the hearth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the string was frozen stiff.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He took the quiver from his neck,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the arrow plumes were iced.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then as the cheerful fire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Revived his languid limbs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The adventurer asked for food.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Woman answered him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And still her speech was song,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“The She Bear she dwells near to me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And she hath cubs, one, two and three.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She hunts the deer and brings him here,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then with her I make good cheer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And she to the chase is gone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And she will be here anon.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She ceased from her work as she spake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when she had answered him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Again her fingers twirled the thread</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And again the Woman began</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In low, sweet, tones to sing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The unintelligible song.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The thread she spun it gleamed like gold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the light of the odorous fire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yet so wonderous thin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That save when the light shone on it</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It could not be seen by the eye.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The youth sat watching it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And she beheld his wonder.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then again she spake to him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And still her speech was song,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Now twine it round thy hands I say,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now twine it round thy hands I pray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My thread is small, my thread is fine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But he must be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A stronger than thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who can break this thread of mine!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And up she raised her bright blue eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sweetly she smiled on him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he conceived no ill.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And round and round his right hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And round and round his left,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He wound the thread so fine.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then again the Woman spake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And still her speech was song,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Now thy strength, O Stranger, strain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now then break the slender chain.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thalaba strove, but the thread</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was woven by magic hands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in his cheek the flush of shame</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Arose, commixt with fear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She beheld and laughed at him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then again she sung,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“My thread is small, my thread is fine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But he must be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A stronger than thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who can break this thread of mine.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And up she raised her bright blue eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And fiercely she smiled on him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I thank thee, I thank thee, Hodeirah’s Son!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I thank thee for doing what can’t be undone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For binding thyself in the chain I have spun!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then from his head she wrenched</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A lock of his raven hair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And cast it in the fire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And cried aloud as it burnt,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Sister! Sister! hear my voice!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sister! Sister! come and rejoice,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The web is spun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The prize is won,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The work is done,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For I have made captive Hoderiah’s Son.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Borne in her magic car</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Sister Sorceress came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Khawla, the fiercest of the Sorcerer brood.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She gazed upon the youth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She bade him break the slender thread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She laughed aloud for scorn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She clapt her hands for joy.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The She Bear from the chase came in,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She bore the prey in her bloody mouth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She laid it at Maimuna’s feet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And she looked up with wistful eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As if to ask her share.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“There! there!” quoth Maimuna</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And pointing to the prisoner youth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She spurned him with her foot,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bade her make her meal.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But soon their mockery failed them</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And anger and shame arose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the She Bear fawned on Thalaba</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And quietly licked his hand.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The grey haired Sorceress stamped the ground</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And called a Spirit up,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Shall we bear the Enemy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the dungeon dens below?”</span>
			</p>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Spirit</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Woe! woe! to our Empire woe!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If ever he tread the caverns below.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Maimuna</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Shall we leave him fettered here</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With hunger and cold to die?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Spirit</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Away from thy lonely dwelling fly!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here I see a danger nigh</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That he should live and thou shouldst die.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Maimuna</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Whither must we bear the foe?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Spirit</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>To Mohareb’s island go,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There shalt thou secure the foe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There prevent thy future woe.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<p>
				<span>Then in the Car they threw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fettered Thalaba,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And took their seats, and set</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their feet upon his neck,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Maimuna held the reins</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Khawla shook the scourge</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And away!<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-143" id="noteref-143" epub:type="noteref">143</a> away! away!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They were no steeds of mortal race</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That drew the magic car</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the swiftness of feet and of wings.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The snow-dust rises behind them,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ice-rocks splinters fly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hark! in the valley below</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sound of their chariot wheels</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And they are far over the mountains.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Away! away! away!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Demons of the air</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shout their joy as the Sisters pass,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Ghosts of the Wicked that wander by night</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flit over the magic car.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Away! away! away!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Over the hills and the plains</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Over the rivers and rocks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Over the sands of the shore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The waves of ocean heave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Under the magic steeds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With unwet hoofs they trample the deep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now they reach the Island coast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And away to the city the Monarch’s abode.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Open fly the city gates,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Open fly the iron doors</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The doors of the palace court.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then stopped the charmed car.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Monarch heard the chariot wheels</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And forth he came to greet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Mistress whom he served.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He knew the captive youth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Thalaba beheld</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mohareb in<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-144" id="noteref-144" epub:type="noteref">144</a> the robes of royalty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whom erst his arm had thrust</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Down the bitumen pit.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
