<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Book IV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="book-4" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Book</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</span>
				</h2>
				<blockquote epub:type="epigraph z3998:verse" xml:lang="la">
					<p>
						<span>—Fas est quoque brutae</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Telluri, docilem monitis coelestibus esse.</span>
					</p>
					<cite>Mambruni Constantinus</cite>
				</blockquote>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span>Whose is yon dawning form,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That in the darkness meets</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The delegated youth?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dim as the shadow of a fire at noon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or pale reflection on the evening brook</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Glow-worm on the bank</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Kindled to guide her winged paramour.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>A moment, and the brightening image shaped</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His Mother’s form and features. “Go,” she cried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“To Babylon, and from the Angels learn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What talisman thy task requires.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Spirit hung towards him when she ceased,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As tho’ with actual lips she would have given</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A mother’s kiss⁠ ⁠… his arms outstretched,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His body bending on,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His lips unclosed and trembling into speech</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He prest to meet the blessing,⁠ ⁠… but the wind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Played on his cheek: he looked, and he beheld</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The darkness close. “Again! again!” he cried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Let me again behold thee!” from the darkness</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His Mother’s voice went forth;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Thou shall behold me in the hour of death.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Day dawns, the twilight gleam dilates,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Sun comes forth and like a God</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rides thro’ rejoicing heaven.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Old Moath and his daughter from their tent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beheld the adventurous youth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dark moving o’er the sands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A lessening image, trembling thro’ their tears.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Visions of high emprize</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beguiled his lonely road;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And if sometimes to Moath’s tent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The involuntary mind recurred,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fancy, impatient of all painful thoughts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pictured the bliss should welcome his return.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In dreams like these he went,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And still of every dream</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Oneiza formed a part,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Hope and Memory made a mingled joy.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>In the eve he arrived at a Well,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Acacia bent over its side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Under whose long light-hanging boughs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He chose his night’s abode.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There, due ablutions made and prayers performed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The youth his mantle spread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And silently produced</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His solitary meal.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The silence and the solitude recalled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dear recollections, and with folded arms,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thinking of other days, he sate, till thought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had left him, and the Acacia’s moving shade</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the sunny sand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had caught his idle eye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And his awakened ear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heard the grey Lizard’s chirp,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The only sound of life.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>As thus in vacant quietness he sate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A Traveller on a Camel reached the Well,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And courteous greeting gave.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mutual salutation past,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He by the cistern too his garment spread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And friendly converse cheered the social meal.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The Stranger was an antient man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet one whose green old age</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bore the fair characters of temperate youth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So much of manhood’s strength his limbs retained,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It seemed he needed not the staff he bore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His beard was long, and grey, and crisp;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lively his eyes and quick,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And reaching over them</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The large broad eye-brow curled.⁠ ⁠…</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His speech was copious, and his winning words</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Enriched with knowledge, that the attentive youth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sate listening with a thirsty joy.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So in the course of talk</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The adventurer youth enquired</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whither his course was bent;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Old Man answered, “to Bagdad I go.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At that so welcome sound a flash of joy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Kindled the eye of Thalaba;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“And I too,” he replied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Am journeying thitherward,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let me become companion of thy way!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Courteous the Old Man smiled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And willing in assent.⁠ ⁠…</span>
			</p>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Old Man</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Son, thou art young for travel.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Thalaba</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Until now</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I never past the desert boundary.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Old Man</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>It is a noble city that we seek.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou wilt behold magnificent palaces,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And lofty obelisks, and high-domed Mosques,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And rich Bazars, whither from all the world</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Industrious merchants meet, and market there</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The World’s collected wealth.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Thalaba</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Stands not Bagdad</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Near to the site of ancient Babylon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Nimrod’s impious temple?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Old Man</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>From the walls</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis but a long day’s distance.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Thalaba</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And the ruins?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Old Man</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>A mighty mass remains; enough to tell us</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How great our<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-70" id="noteref-70" epub:type="noteref">70</a> fathers were, how little we.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Men are not what they were; their crimes and follies</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have dwarfed them down from the old hero race</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To such poor things as we!</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Thalaba</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>At Babylon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I have heard the Angels expiate their guilt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Haruth and Maruth.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Old Man</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>’Tis a history</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Handed from ages down; the nurses make it</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A tale to please their children,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And as their garrulous ignorance relates</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We learn it and believe⁠ ⁠… but all things feel</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The power of Time and Change! thistles and grass</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Usurp the desolate palace, and the weeds</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Falshood root in the aged pile of Truth.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How have you heard the tale?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Thalaba</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Thus⁠ ⁠… on a time</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Angels at the wickedness of man</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Expressed indignant wonder: that in vain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tokens and signs were given, and Prophets sent,⁠ ⁠…</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Strange obstinacy this! a stubborness</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of sin, they said, that should for ever bar</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The gates of mercy on them. Allah heard</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their unforgiving pride, and bade that two</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of these untempted Spirits should descend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Judges on earth. Haruth and Maruth went,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The chosen Sentencers; they fairly heard</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The appeals of men to their tribunal brought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And rightfully decided. At the length</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A Woman came before them⁠ ⁠… beautiful</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Zohara was, as yonder Evening star,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the mild lustre<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-71" id="noteref-71" epub:type="noteref">71</a> of whose lovely light</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even now her beauty shines. They gazed on her</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With fleshly eyes, they tempted her to sin.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The wily woman listened, and required</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A previous price, the knowledge of the name<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-72" id="noteref-72" epub:type="noteref">72</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of God. She learnt the wonder-working name</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And gave it utterance, and its virtue bore her</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Up to the glorious Presence, and she told</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before the aweful Judgement-Seat, her tale.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Old Man</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>I know the rest, the accused Spirits were called:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unable of defence, and penitent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They owned their crime and heard the doom deserved.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then they besought the Lord that not for ever</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His wrath might be upon them; and implored</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That penal ages might at length restore them</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Clean from offence, since then by Babylon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the cavern of their punishment they dwell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Runs the conclusion so?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Thalaba</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>So I am taught.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Old Man</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The common tale! and likely thou hast heard</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How that the bold and bad, with impious rites</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Intrude upon their penitence, and force,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Albeit from loathing and reluctant lips,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sorcery-secret?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Thalaba</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Is it not the truth?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Old Man</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Son, thou hast seen the Traveller in the sands</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Move in the dizzy light of the hot noon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Huge<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-73" id="noteref-73" epub:type="noteref">73</a> as the giant race of elder times,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And his Camel, than the monstrous Elephant,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Seem of a vaster bulk.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Thalaba</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>A frequent sight.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Old Man</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And hast thou never in the twilight, fancied</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Familiar object into some strange shape</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And form uncouth?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Thalaba</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Aye! many a time.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Old Man</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Even so</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Things viewed at distance thro’ the mist of fear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In their distortion terrify and shock</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The abused sight.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Thalaba</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But of these Angels fate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus in the uncreated Book is written.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Old Man</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Wisely from legendary fables, Heaven</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Inculcates wisdom.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Thalaba</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>How then is the truth?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is not the dungeon of their punishment</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By ruined Babylon?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Old Man</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>By Babylon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Haruth and Maruth may be found.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Thalaba</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And there</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Magician learn their impious sorcery?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Old Man</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Son what thou sayest is true, and it is false.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But night approaches fast; I have travelled far</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And my old lids are heavy⁠ ⁠… on our way</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We shall have hours for converse, let us now</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Turn to our due repose. Son, peace be with thee!</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<p>
				<span>So in his loosened cloak</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Old Man wrapt<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-74" id="noteref-74" epub:type="noteref">74</a> himself</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And laid his limbs at length:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Thalaba in silence laid him down.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Awhile he lay and watched the lovely Moon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er whose broad orb the boughs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A mazy fretting framed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or with a pale transparent green</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lighting the restless leaves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The thin Acacia leaves that played above.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The murmuring wind, the moving leaves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lulled him to sleep with mingled lullabies.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Not so the dark Magician by his side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lobaba, who from the Domdaniel caves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had sought the dreaded youth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Silent he lay, and simulating sleep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till by the long and regular breath he knew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The youth beside him slept.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Carefully then he rose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bending over him, surveyed him near</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And secretly he cursed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The dead Abdaldar’s ring,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Armed by whose amulet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He slept from danger safe.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Wrapped in his mantle Thalaba reposed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His loose right arm pillowing his head.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Moon was on the Ring,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose crystal gem returned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A quiet, moveless light.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Vainly the Wizard vile put forth his hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And strove to reach the gem,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Charms strong as hell could make them, made it safe.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He called his servant fiends,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He bade the Genii rob the sleeping youth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the virtue of the Ring,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By Mohammed’s holier power,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the holiest name of God,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had Thalaba disarmed the evil race.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Baffled and weary, and convinced at length,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Anger, and fear, and rancour gnawing him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The accursed Sorcerer ceased his vain attempts.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Content perforce to wait</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Temptations likelier aid.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Restless he lay, and brooding many a wile,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And tortured with impatient hope,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And envying with the bitterness of hate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The innocent youth, who slept so sweetly by.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The ray of morning on his eye lids fell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Thalaba awoke</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And folded his mantle around him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And girded his loins for the day;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then the due rites of holiness observed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His comrade too arose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with the outward forms</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of righteousness and prayer insulted God.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They filled their water skin, they gave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Camel his full draught.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then on their road while yet the morn was young</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the air was fresh with dew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forward the travellers went,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With various talk beguiling the long way.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But soon the youth, whose busy mind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dwelt on Lobaba’s wonder-stirring words,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Renewed the unfinished converse of the night.</span>
			</p>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Thalaba</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Thou saidest that it is true, and yet is false,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That men accurst, attain at Babylon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forbidden knowledge from the Angel pair.⁠ ⁠…</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How mean you?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lobaba</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>All things have a double power,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alike for good and evil, the same fire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That on the comfortable hearth at eve</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Warmed the good man, flames o’er the house at night</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Should we for this forego</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The needful element?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because the scorching summer Sun</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Darts fever, wouldst thou quench the orb of day?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or deemest thou that Heaven in anger formed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Iron to till the field, because when man</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had tipt his arrows for the chase, he rushed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A murderer to the war?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Thalaba</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>What follows hence?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lobaba</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>That nothing in itself is good or evil,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But only in its use. Think you the man</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Praiseworthy who by painful study learns</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The knowledge of all simples, and their power</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Healing or harmful?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Thalaba</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>All men hold in honour</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The skilful Leech. From land to land he goes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Safe in his privilege; the sword of war</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Spares him, Kings welcome him with costly gifts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he who late had from the couch of pain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lifted a languid look to him for aid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Views him with brightened eyes, and blesses him</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In his first thankful prayer.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lobaba</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Yet some there are</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who to the purposes of wickedness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Apply this knowledge, and from herbs distil</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Poison to mix it in the trusted draught.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Thalaba</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Allah shall cast them in the fire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose fuel is the cursed! there shall they</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Endure the ever-burning agony</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Consuming<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-75" id="noteref-75" epub:type="noteref">75</a> still in flames, and still renewed.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lobaba</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But is their knowledge therefore in itself</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unlawful?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Thalaba</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>That were foolishness to think.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lobaba</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>O what a glorious animal were Man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Knew he but his own powers! and knowing gave them</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Room for their growth and spread! the Horse obeys</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His guiding will, the patient Camel bears him</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Over these wastes of sand, the Pigeon wafts</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His bidding thro’ the sky: and with these triumphs</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He rests contented! with these ministers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When he might awe the Elements, and make</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Myriads of Spirits serve him!</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Thalaba</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But as how!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By a league with Hell, a covenant that binds</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The soul to utter death!</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lobaba</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Was Solomon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Accurst of God? yet to his talismans</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Obedient, o’er his throne the birds of Heaven</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their waving wings<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-76" id="noteref-76" epub:type="noteref">76</a> his sun-shield, fanned around him</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The motionless air of noon: from place to place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As his will reined the viewless Element</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He rode the Wind: the Genii reared his temple,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ceaselessly in fear while his dead eye</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O’erlooked them, day and night pursued their toil,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So dreadful was his power.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Thalaba</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But ’twas from Heaven</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His wisdom came; God’s special gift⁠ ⁠… the guerdon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of early virtue.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lobaba</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Learn thou, O young man!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>God hath appointed Wisdom the reward</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of study! ’tis a spring of living waters,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose inexhaustible bounties all might drink</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But few dig deep enough. Son! thou art silent,⁠ ⁠…</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Perhaps I say too much,⁠ ⁠… perhaps offend thee.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Thalaba</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Nay, I am young, and willingly as becomes me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hear the wise words of age.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lobaba</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Is it a crime</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To mount the horse, because forsooth thy feet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Can serve thee for the journey? is it sin</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because the Hern soars upward in the sky</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Above the arrow’s flight, to train the Falcon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose beak shall pierce him there? the powers which All</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Granted to man, were granted for his use;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All knowledge that befits not human weakness</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is placed beyond its reach.⁠ ⁠… They who repair</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To Babylon, and from the Angels learn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mysterious wisdom, sin not in the deed.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Thalaba</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Know you these secrets?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lobaba</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>I? alas my Son</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My age just knows enough to understand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How little all its knowledge! later years</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sacred to study, teach me to regret</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Youth’s unforeseeing indolence, and hours</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That cannot be recalled! something I know:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The properties of herbs, and have sometimes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Brought to the afflicted comfort and relief</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By the secrets of my art; under His blessing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Without whom all had failed! Also of Gems</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I have some knowledge, and the characters</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That tell beneath what aspect they were set.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Thalaba</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Belike you can interpret then the graving</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Around this Ring?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lobaba</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>My sight is feeble, Son,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I must view it closer, let me try!</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<p>
				<span>The unsuspecting Youth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Held forth his linger to draw off the spell.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even whilst he held it forth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There settled there a Wasp,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And just above the Gem infixed its dart.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All purple swoln the hot and painful flesh</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rose round the tightened Ring.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The baffled Sorcerer knew the hand of Heaven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And inwardly blasphemed.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ere long Lobaba’s heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fruitful in wiles, devised new stratagem.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A mist arose at noon;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like the loose hanging skirts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of some low cloud that, by the breeze impelled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sweeps o’er the mountain side.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With joy the thoughtless youth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That grateful shadowing hailed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For grateful was the shade,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While thro’ the silver-lighted haze</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Guiding their way, appeared the beamless Sun.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But soon that beacon failed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A heavier mass of cloud</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Impenetrably deep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hung o’er the wilderness.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Knowest thou the track?” quoth Thalaba,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Or should we pause, and wait the wind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To scatter this bewildering fog?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Sorcerer answered him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Now let us hold right on,⁠ ⁠… for if we stray</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Sun tomorrow will direct our course.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So saying, he towards the desert depths</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Misleads the youth deceived.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Earlier the night came on,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor moon, nor stars, were visible in Heaven;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when at morn the youth unclosed his eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He knew not where to turn his face in prayer.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“What shall we do?” Lobaba cried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“The lights of Heaven have ceased</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To guide us on our way.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should we remain and wait</span>
				<br/>
				<span>More favourable skies?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Soon would our food and water fail us here!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And if we venture on,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There are the dangers of the wilderness!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Sure it were best proceed!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The chosen youth replies.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“So haply we may reach some tent, or grove</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of dates, or stationed tribe.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But idly to remain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were yielding effortless, and waiting death.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wily Sorcerer willingly assents,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And farther in the sands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Elate of heart, he leads the credulous youth.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Still o’er the wilderness</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Settled the moveless mist.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The timid Antelope that heard their steps</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stood doubtful where to turn in that dim light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Ostrich, blindly hastening, met them full.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At night again in hope,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Young Thalaba laid down;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The morning came, and not one guiding ray</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thro’ the thick mist was visible,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The same deep moveless mist that mantled all.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Oh for the Vulture’s scream</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That haunts for prey the abode of humankind!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Oh for the Plover’s<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-77" id="noteref-77" epub:type="noteref">77</a> pleasant cry</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To tell of water near!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Oh for the Camel-driver’s<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-78" id="noteref-78" epub:type="noteref">78</a> song!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For now the water-skin grows light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tho’ of the draught, more eagerly desired,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Imperious prudence took with sparing thirst.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Oft from the third night’s broken sleep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As in his dreams he heard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sound of rushing winds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Started the anxious youth, and looked abroad,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In vain! for still the deadly calm endured.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Another day past on,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The water-skin was drained,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But then one hope arrived</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For there was motion in the air!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sound of the wind arose anon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That scattered the thick mist,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lo! at length the lovely face of Heaven!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Alas⁠ ⁠… a wretched scene</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was opened on their view.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They looked around, no wells were near,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No tent, no human aid!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flat on the Camel lay the water-skin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And their dumb servant difficultly now,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Over hot sands and under the hot sun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dragged on with patient pain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But oh the joy! the blessed sight!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When in the burning waste the Travellers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Saw a green meadow, fair with flowers besprent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Azure and yellow, like the beautiful fields</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of England, when amid the growing grass</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The blue-bell bends, the golden king-cup shines,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the merry month of May!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Oh joy! the Travellers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gaze on each other with hope-brightened eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For sure thro’ that green meadow flows</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The living stream! and lo! their famished beast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sees the restoring sight!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hope gives his feeble limbs a sudden strength,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He hurries on!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The herbs so fair to eye</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were Senna, and the Gentian’s blossom blue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And kindred plants that with unwatered root</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fed in the burning sand, whose bitter leaves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even frantic<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-79" id="noteref-79" epub:type="noteref">79</a> Famine loathed.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>In uncommunicating misery</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Silent they stood. At length Lobaba cried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Son we must slay the Camel, or we die</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For lack of water! thy young hand is firm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Draw forth the knife and pierce him!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wretch accurst,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who that beheld thy venerable face,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy features fixed with suffering, the dry lips,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The feverish eyes, could deem that all within</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was magic ease, and fearlessness secure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wiles of hellish import? the young man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Paused with reluctant pity: but he saw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His comrade’s red and painful countenance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And his own burning breath came short and quick,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And at his feet the gasping beast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lies, over-worn with want.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then from his<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-80" id="noteref-80" epub:type="noteref">80</a> girdle Thalaba took the knife</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With stern compassion, and from side to side</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Across<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-81" id="noteref-81" epub:type="noteref">81</a> the Camel’s throat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drew deep the crooked blade.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Servant of man, that merciful deed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For ever ends thy suffering, but what doom</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Waits thy deliverer! “little will thy death</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Avail us!” thought the youth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As in the water-skin he poured</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Camel’s hoarded draught:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It gave a scant supply,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The poor allowance of one prudent day.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Son of Hodeirah, tho’ thy steady soul</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Despaired not, firm in faith,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet not the less did suffering Nature feel</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her pangs and trials, long their craving thirst</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Struggled with fear, by fear itself inflamed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But drop by drop, that poor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That last supply is drained!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still the same burning sun! no cloud in heaven!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hot air quivers, and the sultry mist</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Floats o’er the desert, with a show</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of distant<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-82" id="noteref-82" epub:type="noteref">82</a> waters, mocking their distress!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The youth’s parched lips were black,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His tongue was<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-83" id="noteref-83" epub:type="noteref">83</a> dry and rough,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His eye-balls red with heat.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His comrade gazed on him with looks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That seemed to speak of pity, and he said</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Let me behold thy Ring,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It may have virtue that can save us yet!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With that he took his hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And viewed the writing close,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then cried with sudden joy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“It is a stone that whoso bears</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Genii must obey!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now raise thy voice, my Son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bid them in his name that here is written</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Preserve us in our need.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Nay!” answered Thalaba,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Shall I distrust the providence of God?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is it not He must save?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If Allah wills it not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Vain were the Genii’s aid.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Whilst he spake Lobaba’s eye</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full on the distance fixed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Attended not his speech.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its fearful meaning drew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The looks of Thalaba.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Columns of sand came moving on,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Red in the burning ray</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like obelisks of fire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They rushed before the driving wind.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Vain were all thoughts of flight!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They had not hoped escape</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Could they have backed the Dromedary then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who in his rapid race</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gives to the tranquil<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-84" id="noteref-84" epub:type="noteref">84</a> air, a drowning force.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>High⁠ ⁠… high in heaven upcurled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The dreadful<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-85" id="noteref-85" epub:type="noteref">85</a> columns moved,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swift, as the whirlwind that impelled their way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They rushed towards the Travellers!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The old Magician shrieked,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lo! the foremost bursts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before the whirlwind’s force,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Scattering afar a burning shower of sand.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Now by the virtue of the Ring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Save us!” Lobaba cried.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“While yet thou hast the power</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Save us. O save us! now!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The youth made no reply,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gazing in aweful wonder on the scene.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Why dost thou wait?” the Old Man exclaimed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“If Allah and the Prophet will not save</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Call on the Powers that will!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Ha! do I know thee, Infidel accurst?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Exclaimed the awakened youth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“And thou hast led me hither, Child of Sin!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That fear might make me sell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My soul to endless death!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Fool that thou art!” Lobaba cried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Call upon him whose name</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy charmed signet bears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or die the death thy foolishness deserves!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Servant of Hell! die thou!” quoth Thalaba.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And leaning on his bow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He fitted the loose string,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And laid the arrow in its resting-place.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Bow of my Father, do thy duty now!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He drew the arrow to its point,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>True to his eye it fled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And full upon the breast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It smote the wizard man.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Astonished Thalaba beheld</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The blunted point recoil.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>A proud and bitter smile</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wrinkled Lobaba’s cheek,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Try once again thine earthly arms!” he cried.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Rash Boy! the Power I serve</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Abandons not his votaries.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It is for Allah’s wretched slaves, like thou,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To serve a master, who in the hour of need</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forsakes them to their fate!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I leave thee!”⁠ ⁠… and he shook his staff, and called</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Chariot of his Charms.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Swift as the viewless wind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Self-moved, the Chariot came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Sorcerer mounts the seat.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Yet once more weigh thy danger!” he exclaimed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Ascend the car with me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with the speed of thought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We pass the desert bounds.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The indignant youth vouchsafed not to reply,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lo! the magic car begins its course!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hark! hark!⁠ ⁠… he screams.⁠ ⁠… Lobaba screams!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What wretch, and hast thou raised</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rushing Terrors of the Wilderness</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To fall on thine own head?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Death! death! inevitable death!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Driven by the breath of God</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A column of the Desert met his way.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
