<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Book II</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="book-2" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Book</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</span>
				</h2>
				<blockquote epub:type="epigraph z3998:verse">
					<p xml:lang="la">
						<span>Sint licet expertes vitae sensusque, capessunt</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Jussa tamen superum venti.</span>
					</p>
					<cite>Mambruni Constantinus</cite>
				</blockquote>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span>Not in the desert</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Son of Hodeirah</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wert thou abandoned!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The coexistent fire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That in the Dens of Darkness burnt for thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Burns yet, and yet shall burn.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>In the Domdaniel caverns</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Under the Roots of the Ocean,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Met the Masters of the Spell.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before them in the vault,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blazing unfuelled from the floor of rock,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ten magic flames arose.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Burn mystic fires!” Abdaldar cried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Burn whilst Hodeirah’s dreaded race exist.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This is the appointed hour,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hour that shall secure these dens of night.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Dim they burn,” exclaimed Lobaba,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Dim they burn, and now they waver!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Okba lifts the arm of death,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They waver,⁠ ⁠… they go out!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Curse on his hasty hand!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Khawla exclaimed in wrath,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The woman-fiend exclaimed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Curse on his hasty hand, the fool hath failed!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Eight only are gone out.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>A Teraph<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-22" id="noteref-22" epub:type="noteref">22</a> stood against the cavern side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A new-born infant’s head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That Khawla at his hour of birth had seized</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And from the shoulders wrung.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It stood upon a plate of gold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An unclean Spirit’s name inscribed beneath.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The cheeks were deathy dark,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dark the dead skin upon the hairless skull;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The lips were bluey pale;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Only the eyes had life,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They gleamed with demon light.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Tell me!” quoth Khawla, “is the Fire gone out</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That threats the Masters of the Spell?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The dead lips moved and spake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“The Fire still burns that threats</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Masters of the Spell.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Curse on thee, Okba!” Khawla cried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As to the den the Sorcerer came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He bore the dagger in his hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hot from the murder of Hodeirah’s race.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Behold those unextinguished flames!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fire still burns that threats</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Masters of the Spell!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Okba, wert thou weak of heart?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Okba, wert thou blind of eye?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy fate and ours were on the lot,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And we believed the lying stars</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That said thy hand might seize the auspicious hour!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou hast let slip the reins of Destiny,⁠ ⁠…</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Curse thee, curse thee, Okba!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The Murderer answering said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“O versed in all enchanted lore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou better knowest Okba’s soul.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Eight blows I struck, eight home-driven blows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Needed no second stroke</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From this envenomed blade.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ye frown at me as if the will had failed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As if ye did not know</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My double danger from Hodeirah’s race,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The deeper hate I feel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The stronger motive that inspired my arm!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ye frown as if my hasty fault,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My ill-directed blow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had spared the enemy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And not the stars that would not give,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And not your feeble spells</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That could not force, the sign</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which of the whole was he!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did ye not bid me strike them all?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Said ye not root and branch should be destroyed?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I heard Hodeirah’s dying groan,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I heard his Children’s shriek of death,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sought to consummate the work,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But o’er the two remaining lives</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A cloud unpierceable had risen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A cloud that mocked my searching eyes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I would have probed it with the dagger-point,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The dagger was repelled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A Voice came forth and cried</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Son of Perdition, cease! thou canst not change</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What in the Book of Destiny is written.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Khawla to the Teraph turned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Tell me where the Prophet’s hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hides our destined enemy?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The dead lips spake again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I view the seas, I view the land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I search the ocean and the earth!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not on Ocean is the Boy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not on Earth his steps are seen.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“A mightier power than we,” Lobaba cried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Protects our destined foe!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Look! look! one fire burns dim!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It quivers! it goes out!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>It quivered, it was quenched.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One flame alone was left,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A pale blue flame that trembled on the earth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A hovering light upon whose shrinking edge</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The darkness seemed to press.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stronger it grew, and spread</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its lucid swell around,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Extending now where all the ten had stood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With lustre more than all.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At that protentous sight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The children of Evil trembled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Terror smote their souls.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Over the den the fire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its fearful splendour cast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The broad base rolling up in wavy streams,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bright as the summer lightning when it spreads</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its glory o’er the midnight heaven.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Teraphs eyes were dimmed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That like two twinkling stars</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shone in the darkness late.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Sorcerers on each other gazed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And every face all pale with fear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And ghastly in that light was seen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like a dead man’s by the sepulchral lamp.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Even Khawla fiercest of the enchanter brood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not without effort drew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her fear suspended breath.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Anon a deeper rage</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Inflamed her reddening eye.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Mighty is thy power, Mohammed!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Loud in blasphemy she cried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“But Eblis<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-23" id="noteref-23" epub:type="noteref">23</a> would not stoop to man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When Man fair statured as the stately palm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From his Creator’s hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was undefiled and pure.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou art mighty, O Son of Abdallah!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But who is he of woman born</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That shall vie with the might of Eblis?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That shall rival the Prince of the Morning?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She said, and raised her skinny hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As in defiance to high Heaven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And stretched her long lean finger forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And spake aloud the words of power.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Spirits heard her call,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lo! before her stands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her Demon Minister.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Spirit!” the Enchantress cried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Where lives the Boy coeval with whose life</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yon magic fire must burn?”</span>
			</p>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Demon</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Mistress of the mighty Spell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not on Ocean, not on Earth.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Only eyes that view</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Allah’s glory throne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>See his hiding-place.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From some believing Spirit, ask and learn.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<p>
				<span>“Bring the dead Hodeirah here,”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Khawla cried, “and he shall tell.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Demon heard her bidding, and was gone.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A moment passed, and at her feet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hodeirah’s corpse was laid.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His hand still held the sword he grasped in death,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The blood not yet had clotted on his wound.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The Sorceress looked and with a smile</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That kindled to more fiendishness</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her hideous features, cried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Where Hodeirah is thy soul?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is it in the<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-24" id="noteref-24" epub:type="noteref">24</a> Zemzem well?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is it in the Eden groves?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Waits it for the judgement-blast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the trump of Israfil?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is it plumed with silver wings</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Underneath the throne of God?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even if beneath his throne</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hodeirah, thou shalt hear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou shalt obey my voice!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She said, and muttered charms that Hell in fear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Heaven in horror heard.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Soon the stiff eye-balls rolled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The muscles with convulsive motion shook,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The white lips quivered. Khawla saw, her soul</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Exulted, and she cried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Prophet! behold my power!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not even death secures</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy slaves from Khawla’s Spell!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where Hodeirah is thy child?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Hodeirah groaned and closed his eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As if in the night and the blindness of death</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He would have hid himself.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Speak to my question!” she exclaimed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Or in that mangled body thou shall live</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ages of torture! answer me!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where can we find the Boy?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“God! God!” Hodeirah cried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Release me from this life,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From this intolerable agony!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Speak!” cried the Sorceress; and she snatched</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A Viper from the floor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with the living reptile lashed<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-25" id="noteref-25" epub:type="noteref">25</a> his neck.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wreathed, round him with the blow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Reptile tighter drew her folds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And raised her wrathful head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And fixed into his face</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her deadly teeth, and shed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Poison in every wound.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In vain! for Allah heard Hodeirah’s prayer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Khawla on a corpse</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had wrecked her baffled rage.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fated fire moved on</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And round the Body wrapt its funeral flames.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The flesh and bones in that portentous pile</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Consumed; the Sword alone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Circled with fire was left.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Where is the Boy for whose hand it is destined?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where the Destroyer who one day shall wield</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Sword that is circled with fire?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Race accursed, try your charms!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Masters of the mighty Spell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mutter o’er your words of power!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ye can shatter the dwellings of man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ye can open the womb of the rock,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ye can shake the foundations of earth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But not the Word of God:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But not one letter can ye change</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of what his Will hath written!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Who shall seek thro’ Araby</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hodeirah’s dreaded son?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They mingle the Arrows<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-26" id="noteref-26" epub:type="noteref">26</a> of Chance</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The lot of Abdaldar is drawn.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thirteen moons must wax and wane</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ere the Sorcerer quit his quest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He must visit every tribe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That roam the desert wilderness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or dwell beside perennial streams;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor leave a solitary tent unsearched</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till he has found the Boy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hated Boy whose blood alone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Can quench that dreaded fire.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>A crystal ring Abdaldar bore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The powerful gem<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-27" id="noteref-27" epub:type="noteref">27</a> condensed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Primeval dews that upon Caucasus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Felt the first winter’s frost.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ripening there it lay beneath</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rock above rock, and mountain ice up-piled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On mountain, till the incumbent mass assumed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So huge its bulk, the Ocean’s azure hue.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>With this he sought the inner den</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where burnt the eternal flame.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like waters gushing from some channelled rock</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full thro’ a narrow opening, from a chasm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The eternal flame streamed up.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No eye beheld the fount</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of that up-flowing flame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That blazed self-nurtured, and for ever, there.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It was no mortal element: the Abyss</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Supplied it, from the fountains at the first</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Prepared. In the heart of earth it lives and glows</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her vital heat, till at the day decreed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The voice of God shall let its billows loose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To deluge o’er with no abating flood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The consummated World;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That thenceforth thro’ the air must roll,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The penal Orb of Fire.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Unturbaned and unsandalled there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Abdaldar stood before the flame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And held the Ring beside, and spake</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The language that the Elements obey.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The obedient flame detatched a portion forth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That, in the crystal entering, was condensed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gem of the gem, its living Eye of fire.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the hand that wears the spell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall touch the destined Boy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then shall that Eye be quenched,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the freed Element</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fly to its sacred and remembered Spring.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Now go thy way Abdaldar!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Servant of Eblis,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Over Arabia</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seek the Destroyer!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Over the sands of the scorching Tchama,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Over the waterless mountains of Naïd,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In Arud pursue him; and Yemen the happy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Hejaz, the country beloved by believers.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Over Arabia</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Servant of Eblis,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seek the Destroyer.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>From tribe to tribe, from town to town,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From tent to tent, Abdaldar past.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Him every morn the all-beholding Eye</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Saw from his couch, unhallowed by a prayer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rise to the scent of blood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And every night lie down.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That rankling hope within him, that by day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Goaded his steps, still stinging him in sleep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And startling him with vain accomplishment</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From visions still the same.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Many a time his wary hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To many a youth applied the Ring,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And still the dagger in his mantle hid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was ready for the deed.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>At length to the cords of a tent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That were stretched by an Island of Palms</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the desolate sea of the sands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The weary traveller came.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Under a shapely palm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Herself as shapely, there a Damsel stood.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She held her ready robe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And looked towards a Boy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who from the tree above</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With one hand clinging to its trunk,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cast with the other down the clustered dates.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The Wizard approached the Tree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He leaned on his staff, like a way-faring man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the sweat of his travel was seen on his brow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He asks for food, and lo!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Damsel proffers him her lap of dates.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the Stripling descends, and runs into the tent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And brings him forth water, the draught of delight.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Anon the Master of the tent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Father of the family</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Came forth, a man in years, of aspect mild.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the stranger approaching he gave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The friendly saluting of peace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bade the skin be spread.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before the tent they spread the<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-28" id="noteref-28" epub:type="noteref">28</a> skin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Under a Tamarind’s shade,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That bending forward, stretched</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its boughs of beauty far.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They brought the Traveller rice,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With no false colours<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-29" id="noteref-29" epub:type="noteref">29</a> tinged to tempt the eye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But white as the new-fallen snow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When never yet the sullying Sun</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hath seen its purity,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor the warm Zephyr touched and tainted it.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The dates of the grove before their guest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They laid, and the luscious fig,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And water from the well.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Damsel from the Tamarind tree</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had plucked its acid fruit</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And steeped it in water long;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And whoso drank of the cooling<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-30" id="noteref-30" epub:type="noteref">30</a> draught</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He would not wish for wine.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This to the guest the Damsel brought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And a modest pleasure kindled her cheek,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When raising from the cup his moistened lips</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Stranger smiled, and praised, and drank again.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Whither is gone the Boy?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He had pierced the Melon’s pulp</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And closed with wax the wound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he had duly gone at morn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And watched its ripening rind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now all joyfully he brings</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The treasure now matured.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His dark eyes sparkle with a boy’s delight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As he pours out its liquid<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-31" id="noteref-31" epub:type="noteref">31</a> lusciousness</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And proffers to the guest.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Abdaldar ate, and he was satisfied:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now his tongue discoursed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of regions far remote,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As one whose busy feet had travelled long.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Father of the family,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With a calm eye and quiet smile,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sat pleased to hearken him.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Damsel who removed the meal,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She loitered on the way</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And listened with full<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-32" id="noteref-32" epub:type="noteref">32</a> hands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A moment motionless.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All eagerly the Boy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Watches the Traveller’s lips,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And still the wily man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With seemly kindness to the eager Boy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Directs his winning tale.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ah, cursed man! if this be he,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If thou hast found the object of thy search,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy hate, thy bloody aim,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into what deep damnation wilt thou plunge</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy miserable soul!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Look! how his eye delighted watches thine!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Look! how his open lips</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gasp at the winning tale!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And nearer now he comes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To lose no word of that delightful talk.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then, as in familiar mood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the Stripling’s arm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Sorcerer laid his hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the fire of the Crystal fled.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Whilst the sudden shoot of joy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Made pale Abdaldar’s cheek,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Master’s voice was heard:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“It is the hour<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-33" id="noteref-33" epub:type="noteref">33</a> of prayer,⁠ ⁠…</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My children, let us purify ourselves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And praise the Lord our God!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Boy the water brought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>After the law<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-34" id="noteref-34" epub:type="noteref">34</a> they purified themselves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bent their faces to the earth in prayer.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>All, save Abdaldar; over Thalaba</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He stands, and lifts the dagger to destroy.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before his lifted arm received</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its impulse to descend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Blast of the Desert came.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Prostrate in prayer, the pious family</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Felt not the Simoom<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-35" id="noteref-35" epub:type="noteref">35</a> pass.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They rose, and lo! the Sorcerer lying dead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Holding the dagger in his blasted hand.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
