<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Book VII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="book-7" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<h2>
				<span epub:type="label">Book</span>
				<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</span>
			</h2>
			<p>
				<span>From fear, amazement, joy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At length the Arabian Maid recovering speech,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Threw around Thalaba her arms and cried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“My father! O my father!” Thalaba</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In wonder lost, yet fearful to enquire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bent down his cheek on hers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And their tears mingled as they fell.</span>
			</p>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">ONEIZA</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>At night they seized me, Thalaba! in my sleep,...</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou wert not near,... and yet when in their grasp</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I woke, my shriek of terror called on thee.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My father could not save me,... an old man!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And they were strong and many,... O my God,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The hearts they must have had to hear his prayers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And yet to leave him childless!</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">THALABA</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>We will seek him.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We will return to Araby.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">ONEIZA</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Alas!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We should not find him, Thalaba! our tent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is desolate, the wind hath heaped the sands</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Within its door, the lizard’s<a href="#Footnote_132_132">[132]</a> track is left</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fresh on the untrodden dust; prowling by night</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The tyger, as he passes hears no breath</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of man, and turns to search its solitude.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alas! he strays a wretched wanderer</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Seeking his child! old man, he will not rest,...</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He cannot rest, his sleep is misery,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His dreams are of my wretchedness, my wrongs....</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O Thalaba! this is a wicked place!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let us be gone!</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">THALABA</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But how to pass again</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The iron doors that opening at a breath</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gave easy entrance? armies in their strength,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would fail to move those hinges for return!</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">ONEIZA</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But we can climb the mountains that shut in</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This dreadful garden.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">THALABA</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Are Oneiza’s limbs</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Equal to that long toil?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">ONEIZA</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Oh I am strong</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dear Thalaba! for this ... fear gives me force,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And you are with me!</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<p>
				<span>So she took his hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And gently drew him forward, and they went</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Towards the mountain chain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It was broad moonlight, and obscure or lost</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The garden beauties lay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the great boundary rose, distinctly marked.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These were no little hills,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No sloping uplands lifting to the sun</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their vine-yards, with fresh verdure, and the shade</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of ancient woods, courting the loiterer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To win the easy ascent: stone mountains these</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Desolate rock on rock,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The burthens of the earth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose snowy summits met the morning beam</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When night was in the vale, whose feet were fixed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the world’s<a href="#Footnote_133_133">[133]</a> foundations. Thalaba surveyed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The heights precipitous,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Impending crags, rocks unascendible,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And summits that had tired the eagle’s wing;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“There is no way!” he cried.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Paler Oneiza grew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hung upon his arm a feebler weight.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But soon again to hope</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Revives the Arabian maid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As Thalaba imparts the sudden thought.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I past a river,” cried the youth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“A full and copious stream.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“The flowing waters cannot be restrained</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“And where they find or force their way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“There we perchance may follow, thitherward</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“The current rolled along.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So saying yet again in hope</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quickening their eager steps</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They turned them thitherward.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Silent and calm the river rolled along,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And at the verge arrived</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of that fair garden, o’er a rocky bed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Towards the mountain base,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still full and silent, held its even way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the deep sound, the dash</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Louder and louder in the distance rose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As if it forced its stream</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Struggling with crags along a narrow pass.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lo! where raving o’er a hollow course</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ever-flowing tide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Foams in a thousand whirlpools! there adown</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The perforated rock</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Plunge the whole waters, so precipitous,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So fathomless a fall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That their earth-shaking roar came deadened up</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like subterranean thunders.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Allah save us!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Oneiza cried, “there is no path for man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“From this accursed place!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And as she spake her joints</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were loosened, and her knees sunk under her.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Cheer up, Oneiza!” Thalaba replied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Be of good heart. We cannot fly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“The dangers of the place,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“But we can conquer them!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And the young Arab’s soul</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Arose within him; “what is he,” he cried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Who has prepared this garden of delight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“And wherefore are its snares?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The Arabian Maid replied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“The Women when I entered, welcomed me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“To Paradise, by Aloadin’s will</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Chosen like themselves, a Houri of the Earth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“They told me, credulous of his blasphemies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“That Aloadin placed them to reward</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“His faithful servants with the joys of Heaven.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“O Thalaba, and all are ready here</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“To wreak his wicked will, and work all crimes!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“How then shall we escape?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Woe to him!” cried the Appointed, a stern smile</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Darkening with stronger shades his countenance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Woe to him! he hath laid his toils</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“To take the Antelope,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“The Lion is come in!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She shook her head, “a Sorcerer he</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“And guarded by so many! Thalaba,...</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“And thou but one!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He raised his hand to Heaven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Is there not God, Oneiza?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I have a Talisman, that, whoso bears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Him, nor the Earthly, nor the Infernal Powers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Of Evil can cast down.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Remember Destiny</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Hath marked me from mankind!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Now rest in faith, and I will guard thy sleep!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So on a violet bank</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Arabian Maid lay down,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her soft cheek pillowed upon moss and flowers.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She lay in silent prayer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till prayer had tranquillized her fears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sleep fell on her. By her side</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Silent sate Thalaba,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And gazed upon the Maid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And as he gazed, drew in</span>
				<br/>
				<span>New courage and intenser faith,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And waited calmly for the eventful day.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Loud sung the Lark, the awakened Maid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beheld him twinkling in the morning light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wished for wings and liberty like his.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The flush of fear inflamed her cheek,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But Thalaba was calm of soul,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Collected for the work.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He pondered in his mind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How from Lobaba’s breast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His blunted arrow fell.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aloadin too might wear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spell perchance of equal power</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To blunt the weapon’s edge!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beside the river-brink,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rose a young poplar, whose unsteady leaves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Varying their verdure to the gale,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With silver glitter caught</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His meditating eye.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then to Oneiza turned the youth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And gave his father’s bow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And o’er her shoulders slung</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The quiver arrow-stored.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Me other weapon suits;” said he,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Bear thou the Bow: dear Maid!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“The days return upon me, when these shafts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“True to thy guidance, from the lofty palm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Brought down the cluster, and thy gladdened eye</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Exulting turned to seek the voice of praise.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Oh! yet again Oneiza, we shall share</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Our desert joys!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So saying to the bank</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He moved, and stooping low,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With double grasp, hand below hand, he clenched</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And from its watry soil</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Uptore the poplar trunk.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then off he shook the clotted earth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And broke away the head</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And boughs and lesser roots,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lifting it aloft</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wielded with able sway the massy club.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Now for this child of Hell!” quoth Thalaba,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Belike he shall exchange to day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“His dainty Paradise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“For other dwelling, and the fruit</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Of Zaccoum,<a href="#Footnote_134_134">[134]</a> cursed tree.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>With that the youth and Arab maid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Towards the garden centre past.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It chanced that Aloadin had convoked</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The garden-habitants,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with the assembled throng</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Oneiza mingled, and the appointed youth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unmarked they mingled, or if one</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With busier finger to his neighbour notes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The quivered Maid, “haply,” he says,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Some daughter of the<a href="#Footnote_135_135">[135]</a> Homerites,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Or one who yet remembers with delight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Her native tents of Himiar!” “Nay!” rejoins</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His comrade, “a love-pageant! for the man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Mimics with that fierce eye and knotty club</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Some savage lion-tamer, she forsooth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Must play the heroine of the years of old!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Radiant with gems upon his throne of gold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aloadin sate.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er the Sorcerer’s head</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hovered a Bird, and in the fragrant air</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Waved his winnowing wings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A living canopy.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Large as the plumeless Cassowar</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was that o’ershadowing Bird;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So huge his talons, in their grasp</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Eagle would have hung a helpless prey.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His beak was iron, and his plumes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Glittered like burnished gold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And his eyes glowed, as tho’ an inward fire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shone thro’ a diamond orb.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The blinded multitude</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Adored the Sorcerer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bent the knee before him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And shouted out his praise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Mighty art thou, the Bestower of joy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“The Lord of Paradise!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aloadin waved his hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In idolizing reverence</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Moveless they stood and mute.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Children of Earth,” he cried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Whom I have guided here</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“By easier passage than the gate of Death,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“The infidel Sultan to whose lands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“My mountains reach their roots,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Blasphemes and threatens me.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Strong are his armies, many are his guards,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Yet may a dagger find him.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Children of Earth, I tempt you not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“With the vain promise of a bliss unseen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“With tales of a hereafter Heaven</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Whence never Traveller hath returned!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Have ye not tasted of the cup of joy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“That in these groves of happiness</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“For ever over-mantling tempts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“The ever-thirsty lip?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Who is there here that by a deed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Of danger will deserve</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“The eternal joys of actual Paradise?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“I!” Thalaba exclaimed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And springing forward, on the Sorcerer’s head</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He dashed the knotty club.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He fell not, tho’ the force</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shattered his skull; nor flowed the blood.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For by some hellish talisman</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His life imprisoned still</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dwelt in the body. The astonished crowd</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stand motionless with fear, and wait</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Immediate vengeance from the wrath of Heaven.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lo! the Bird ... the monster Bird</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Soars up ... then pounces down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To seize on Thalaba!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now Oneiza, bend the bow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now draw the arrow home!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It fled, the arrow from Oneiza’s hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It pierced the monster Bird,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It broke the Talisman.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then darkness covered all,...</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Earth shook, Heaven thundered, and amid the yells</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Spirits accursed, destroyed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Paradise<a href="#Footnote_136_136">[136]</a> of Sin.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>At last the earth was still;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The yelling of the Demons ceased;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Opening the wreck and ruin to their sight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The darkness rolled away. Alone in life</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Amid the desolation and the dead</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stood the Destroyer and the Arabian Maid.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They looked around, the rocks were rent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The path was open, late by magic closed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Awe-struck and silent down the stony glen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They wound their thoughtful way.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Amid the vale below</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tents rose, and streamers played</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And javelins sparkled in the sun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And multitudes encamped</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swarmed, far as eye could follow, o’er the plain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There in his war pavilion sate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In council with his Chiefs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Sultan of the Land.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before his presence there a Captain led</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Oneiza and the appointed Youth.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Obedient to our Lord’s command,” said he,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“We past towards the mountains, and began</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“The ascending strait; when suddenly Earth shook,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“And darkness like the midnight fell around,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“And fire and thunder came from Heaven</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“As tho’ the Retribution day were come.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“After the terror ceased, and when with hearts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Somewhat assured, again we ventured on,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“This youth and woman met us on the way.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“They told us that from Aloadin’s haunt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“They came on whom the judgement-stroke has fallen;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“He and his sinful Paradise at once</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Destroyed by them, the agents they of Heaven.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Therefore I brought them hither, to repeat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“The tale before thy presence; that as search</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Shall prove it false or faithful, to their merit</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Thou mayest reward them.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Be it done to us,”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thalaba answered, “as the truth shall prove!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The Sultan while he spake</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Fixed on him the proud eye of sovereignty;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“If thou hast played with us,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“By Allah and by Ali, Death shall seal</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“The lying lips for ever! if the thing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Be as thou sayest it, Arab, thou shalt stand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Next to ourself!”...</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hark! the cry</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The lengthening cry, the increasing shout</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of joyful multitudes!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Breathless and panting to the tent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bearer of good tidings comes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“O Sultan, live for ever! be thy foes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Like Aloadin all!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“The wrath of God hath smitten him.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Joy at the welcome tale</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shone in the Sultan’s cheek</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Array the Arab in the robe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Of honour,” he exclaimed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“And place a chain of gold around his neck,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“And bind around his brow the diadem,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“And mount him on my steed of state,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“And lead him thro’ the camp,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“And let the Heralds go before and cry</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Thus shall the Sultan reward</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“The man<a href="#Footnote_137_137">[137]</a> who serves him well!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then in the purple robe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They vested Thalaba.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hung around his neck the golden chain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bound his forehead with the diadem,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And on the royal steed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They led him thro’ the camp,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Heralds went before and cried</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Thus shall the Sultan reward</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“The man who serves him well!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>When from the pomp of triumph</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And presence of the King</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thalaba sought the tent allotted him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thoughtful the Arabian Maid beheld</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His animated eye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His cheek inflamed with pride.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Oneiza!” cried the youth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“The King hath done according to his word,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“And made me in the land</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Next to himself be named!...</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“But why that serious melancholy smile?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Oneiza when I heard the voice that gave me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Honour, and wealth, and fame, the instant thought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Arose to fill my joy, that thou wouldest hear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“The tidings, and be happy.”</span>
			</p>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">ONEIZA</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Thalaba</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou wouldest not have me mirthful! am I not</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An orphan,... among strangers?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">THALABA</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But with me.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">ONEIZA</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>My Father,...</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">THALABA</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Nay be comforted! last night</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To what wert thou exposed! in what a peril</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The morning found us! safety, honour, wealth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These now are ours. This instant who thou wert</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Sultan asked. I told him from our childhood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We had been plighted;... was I wrong Oneiza?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when he said with bounties he would heap</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our nuptials,... wilt thou blame me if I blest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His will, that bade me fix the marriage day!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In tears Oneiza?...</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">ONEIZA</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Remember Destiny</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hath marked thee from mankind!</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">THALABA</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Perhaps when Aloadin was destroyed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The mission ceased, else would wise Providence</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With its rewards and blessings strew my path</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus for accomplished service?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">ONEIZA</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Thalaba!</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">THALABA</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Or if haply not, yet whither should I go?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is it not prudent to abide in peace</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till I am summoned?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">ONEIZA</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Take me to the Deserts!</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">THALABA</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But Moath is not there; and wouldest thou dwell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In a Stranger’s tent? thy father then might seek</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In long and fruitless wandering for his child.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">ONEIZA</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Take me then to Mecca!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There let me dwell a servant of the Temple.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bind thou thyself my veil,... to human eye</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It never shall be lifted. There, whilst thou</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shalt go upon thine enterprize, my prayers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dear Thalaba! shall rise to succour thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I shall live,... if not in happiness;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Surely in hope.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">THALABA</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Oh think of better things!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The will of Heaven is plain: by wonderous ways</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It led us here, and soon the common voice</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall tell what we have done, and how we dwell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Under the shadow of the Sultan’s wing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So shall thy father hear the fame, and find us</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What he hath wished us ever.... Still in tears!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still that unwilling eye! nay ... nay.... Oneiza....</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Has then another since I left the tent....</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">ONEIZA</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Thalaba! Thalaba!</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<p>
				<span>With song, with music, and with dance</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bridal pomp proceeds.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Following on the veiled Bride</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fifty female slaves attend</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In costly robes that gleam</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With interwoven gold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sparkle far with gems.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An hundred slaves behind them bear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Vessels of silver and vessels of gold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And many a gorgeous garment gay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The presents that the Sultan gave.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On either hand the pages go</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With torches flaring thro’ the gloom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And trump and timbrel merriment</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Accompanies their way;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And multitudes with loud acclaim</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shout blessings on the Bride.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now they reach the palace pile,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The palace home of Thalaba,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now the marriage feast is spread</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And from the finished banquet now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wedding guests are gone.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Who comes from the bridal chamber?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It is Azrael, the Angel of Death.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
