<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Book III</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="book-3" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<h2>
				<span epub:type="label">Book</span>
				<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</span>
			</h2>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">THALABA</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Oneiza, look! the dead man has a ring,⁠ ⁠…</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Should it be buried with him?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">ONEIZA</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Oh yes⁠ ⁠… yes!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A wicked man! all that he has must needs</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be wicked too!</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">THALABA</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But see,⁠ ⁠… the sparkling stone!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How it has caught the glory of the Sun,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And streams it back again in lines of light!</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">ONEIZA</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Why do you take it from him Thalaba?⁠ ⁠…</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And look at it so near?⁠ ⁠… it may have charms</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To blind, or poison⁠ ⁠… throw it in the grave!⁠ ⁠…</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I would not touch it!</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">THALABA</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And around its rim</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Strange letters,⁠ ⁠…</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">ONEIZA</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Bury it.⁠ ⁠… Oh! bury it!</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">THALABA</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>It is not written as the Koran is;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some other tongue perchance⁠ ⁠… the accursed man</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Said he had been a traveller.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">MOATH</b>
					</p>
					<p>
						<i>coming from the tent.</i>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Thalaba,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What hast thou there?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">THALABA</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>A ring the dead man wore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Perhaps my father, you can read its meaning.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">MOATH</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>No Boy,⁠ ⁠… the letters are not such as ours.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Heap the sand over it! a wicked man</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wears nothing holy.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">THALABA</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Nay! not bury it!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It may be that some traveller who shall enter</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our tent, may read them: or if we approach</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cities where strangers dwell and learned men,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They may interpret.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">MOATH</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>It were better hid</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Under the desert sands. This wretched man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whom God hath smitten in the very purpose</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And impulse of his unpermitted crime,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Belike was some Magician, and these lines</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are of the language that the Demons use.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">ONEIZA</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Bury it! bury it⁠ ⁠… dear Thalaba!</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">MOATH</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Such cursed men there are upon the earth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In league and treaty with the Evil powers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The covenanted enemies of God</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And of all good, dear purchase have they made</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of rule, and riches, and their life-long sway,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Masters, yet slaves of Hell. Beneath the Roots</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Ocean, the Domdaniel caverns lie:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their impious meeting; there they learn the words</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unutterable by man who holds his hope</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Heaven, there brood the Pestilence, and let</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Earthquake loose.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">THALABA</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And he who would have killed me</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was one of these?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">MOATH</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>I know not, but it may be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That on the Table of Destiny, thy name</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is written their Destroyer, and for this</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy life by yonder miserable man</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So sought; so saved by interfering Heaven.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">THALABA</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>His ring has some strange power then?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">MOATH</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Every gem,<a href="#Footnote_36_36">[36]</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>So sages say, has virtue; but the science</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of difficult attainment, some grow pale</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Conscious of poison,<a href="#Footnote_37_37">[37]</a> or with sudden shade</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of darkness, warn the wearer; same preserve</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From spells, or blunt the hostile weapon’s<a href="#Footnote_38_38">[38]</a> edge.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some open rocks and mountains, and lay bare</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their buried treasures; others make the sight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Strong to perceive the presence of all Beings</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thro’ whose pure substance the unaided eye</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Passes, like empty air⁠ ⁠… and in yon stone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I deem some such misterious quality.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">THALABA</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>My father, I will wear it.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">MOATH</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Thalaba!</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">THALABA</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>In God’s name, and the Prophet’s! be its power</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Good, let it serve the righteous: if for evil,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>God and my trust in him shall hallow it.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<p>
				<span>So Thalaba drew on</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The written ring of gold.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then in the hollow grave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They laid Abdaldar’s corpse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And levelled over him the desert dust.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The Sun arose, ascending from beneath</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The horizon’s circling line.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As Thalaba to his ablutions went,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lo! the grave open, and the corpse exposed!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It was not that the winds of night</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had swept away the sands that covered it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For heavy with the undried dew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The desert dust was dark and close around;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the night air had been so moveless calm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It had not from the grove</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shaken a ripe date down.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Amazed to hear the tale</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forth from the tent came Moath and his child.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Awhile the thoughtful man surveyed the corpse</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Silent with downward eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then turning spake to Thalaba and said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I have heard that there are places by the abode</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Of holy men, so holily possessed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“That if a corpse be buried there, the ground</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“With a convulsive effort shakes it out,<a href="#Footnote_39_39">[39]</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Impatient of pollution. Have the feet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Of Prophet or Apostle blest this place?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Ishmael, or Houd, or Saleh, or than all,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Mohammed, holier name? or is the man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“So foul with magic and all blasphemy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“That Earth<a href="#Footnote_40_40">[40]</a> like Heaven rejects him? it is best</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Forsake the station. Let us strike our tent.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“The place is tainted⁠ ⁠… and behold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“The Vulture<a href="#Footnote_41_41">[41]</a> hovers yonder, and his scream</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Chides us that we still we scare him from his banquet.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“So let the accursed one</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Find fitting sepulchre.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then from the pollution of death</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With water they made themselves pure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Thalaba drew up</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fastening of the cords,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Moath furled the tent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And from the grove of palms Oneiza led</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Camels, ready to receive their load.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The dews had ceased to steam</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Towards the climbing Sun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When from the Isle of Palms they went their way.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when the Sun had reached his southern height,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As back they turned their eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The distant Palms arose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like to the top-sails of some far-off fleet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Distinctly seen, where else</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Ocean bounds had blended with the sky.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when the eve came on</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sight returning reached the grove no more.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They planted the pole of their tent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And they laid them down to repose.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>At midnight Thalaba started up,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For he felt that the ring on his finger was moved.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He called on Allah aloud,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he called on the Prophet’s name.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Moath arose in alarm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“What ails thee Thalaba?” he cried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Is the Robber of night at hand?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Dost thou not see,” the youth exclaimed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“A Spirit in the Tent?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Moath looked round and said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“The moon beam shines in the Tent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I see thee stand in the light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“And thy shadow is black on the ground.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thalaba answered not.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Spirit!” he cried, “what brings thee here?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“In the name of the Prophet, speak,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“In the name of Allah, obey!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He ceased, and there was silence in the Tent.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Dost thou not hear?” quoth Thalaba.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The listening man replied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I hear the wind, that flaps</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“The curtain of the Tent.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“The Ring! the Ring!” the youth exclaimed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“For that the Spirit of Evil comes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“By that I see, by that I hear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“In the name of God, I ask thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Who was he that slew my Father?”</span>
			</p>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">DEMON</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Master of the powerful Ring!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Okba, the wise Magician, did the deed.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">THALABA</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Where does the Murderer dwell?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">DEMON</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>In the Domdaniel caverns</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Under the Roots of the Ocean.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">THALABA</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Why were my Father and my brethren slain?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">DEMON</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>We knew from the race of Hodeirah</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The destined destroyer would come.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">THALABA</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Bring me my father’s sword.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">DEMON</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>A fire surrounds the fated-sword,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No Spirit or Magician’s hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Can pierce that guardian flame.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">THALABA</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Bring me his bow and his arrows.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<p>
				<span>Distinctly Moath heard his voice, and She</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who thro’ the Veil of Separation, watched</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All sounds in listening terror, whose suspense</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forbade the aid of prayer.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They heard the voice of Thalaba;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But when the Spirit spake, the motionless air</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Felt not the subtle sounds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Too fine for mortal sense.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>On a sudden the rattle of arrows was heard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the quiver was laid at the feet of the youth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in his hand they saw Hodeirah’s Bow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He eyed the Bow, he twanged the string,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And his heart bounded to the joyous tone.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Anon he raised his voice, and cried</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Go thy way, and never more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Evil Spirit, haunt our tent!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“By the virtue of the Ring,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“By Mohammed’s holier might,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“By the holiest name of God,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Thee and all the Powers of Hell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I adjure and I command</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Never more to trouble us!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Nor ever from that hour</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did rebel Spirit on the Tent intrude,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such virtue had the Spell.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And peacefully the vernal years</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Thalaba past on.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till now without an effort he could bend</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hodeirah’s stubborn Bow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Black were his eyes and bright,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sunny hue of health</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Glowed on his tawny cheek,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His lip was darkened by maturing life;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strong were his shapely limbs, his stature tall;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He was a comely youth.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Compassion for the child</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had first old Moath’s kindly heart possessed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An orphan, wailing in the wilderness.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But when he heard his tale, his wonderous tale,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Told by the Boy with such eye-speaking truth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now with sudden bursts of anger,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now in the agony of tears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now in flashes of prophetic joy.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What had been pity became reverence,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And like a sacred trust from Heaven</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The old man cherished him.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now with a father’s love,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Child of his choice, he loved the Boy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And like a father to the Boy was dear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Oneiza called him brother, and the youth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>More fondly than a brother, loved the maid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The loveliest of Arabian maidens she.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How happily the years</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Thalaba went by!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>It was the wisdom and the will of Heaven</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That in a lonely tent had cast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The lot of Thalaba.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There might his soul develope best</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its strengthening energies;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There might he from the world</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Keep his heart pure and uncontaminate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till at the written hour he should be found</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fit servant of the Lord, without a spot.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Years of his youth, how rapidly ye fled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In that beloved solitude!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is the morn fair, and does the freshening breeze</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flow with cool current o’er his cheek?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lo! underneath the broad-leaved sycamore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With lids half closed he lies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dreaming of days to come.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His dog<a href="#Footnote_42_42">[42]</a> beside him, in mute blandishment,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now licks his listless hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now lifts an anxious and expectant eye</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Courting the wonted caress.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Or comes the Father<a href="#Footnote_43_43">[43]</a> of the Rains</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From his Caves in the uttermost West,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Comes he in darkness and storms?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the blast is loud,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the waters fill</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Travellers tread in the sands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the pouring shower</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Streams adown the roof,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the door-curtain hangs in heavier folds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the outstrained tent flags loosely,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Comfort is within,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The embers chearful glow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sound of the familiar voice,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The song that lightens toil.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Under the common shelter on dry sand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The quiet Camels ruminate their food;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Moath falls the lengthening cord,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As patiently the old Man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Intwines the strong palm-fibers;<a href="#Footnote_44_44">[44]</a> by the hearth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Damsel shakes the coffee-grains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That with warm fragrance fill the tent;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And while with dextrous fingers, Thalaba</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shapes the green basket,<a href="#Footnote_45_45">[45]</a> haply at his feet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her favourite kidling gnaws the twig,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forgiven plunderer, for Oneiza’s sake!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Or when the winter torrent rolls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Down the deep-channelled rain-course, foamingly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dark with its mountain spoils,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With bare feet pressing the wet sand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There wanders Thalaba,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rushing flow, the flowing roar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Filling his yielded faculties;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A vague, a dizzy, a tumultuous joy.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>… Or lingers it a vernal brook<a href="#Footnote_46_46">[46]</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gleaming o’er yellow sands?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beneath the lofty bank reclined,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With idle eye he views its little waves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quietly listening to the quiet flow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While in the breathings of the stirring gale</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The tall canes bend above,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Floating like streamers on the wind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their lank uplifted leaves.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Nor rich,<a href="#Footnote_47_47">[47]</a> nor poor, was Moath; God had given</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Enough, and blest him with a mind content.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No hoarded<a href="#Footnote_48_48">[48]</a> gold disquieted his dreams;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But ever round his station he beheld</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Camels that knew his voice,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And home-birds, grouping at Oneiza’s call,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And goats that, morn and eve,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Came with full udders to the Damsel’s hand.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dear child! the Tent beneath whose shade they dwelt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That was her work; and she had twined</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His girdle’s many-hues;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he had seen his robe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grow in Oneiza’s loom.<a href="#Footnote_49_49">[49]</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>How often with a memory-mingled joy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That made her Mother live before his sight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He watched her nimble finders thread the woof!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or at the hand-mill<a href="#Footnote_50_50">[50]</a> when she knelt and toiled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tost the thin cake on spreading palm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or fixed it on the glowing oven’s side</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With bare<a href="#Footnote_51_51">[51]</a> wet arm, in safe dexterity.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>’Tis the cool evening hour:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Tamarind from the dew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sheaths<a href="#Footnote_52_52">[52]</a> its young fruit, yet green.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before their Tent the mat is spread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The old man’s aweful voice</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Intones<a href="#Footnote_53_53">[53]</a> the holy Book.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What if beneath no lamp-illumined dome,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its marble walls<a href="#Footnote_54_54">[54]</a> bedecked with flourished truth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Azure and gold adornment? sinks the Word</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With deeper influence from the Imam’s voice,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where in the day of congregation, crowds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Perform the duty task?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their Father is their Priest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Stars of Heaven their point<a href="#Footnote_55_55">[55]</a> of prayer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the blue Firmament</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The glorious Temple, where they feel</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The present Deity.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Yet thro’ the purple glow of eve</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shines dimly the white moon.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The slackened bow, the quiver, the long lance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rest on the pillar<a href="#Footnote_56_56">[56]</a> of the Tent.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Knitting light palm-leaves<a href="#Footnote_57_57">[57]</a> for her brother’s brow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The dark-eyed damsel sits;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Old Man tranquilly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Up his curled pipe inhales</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The tranquillizing herb.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So listen they the reed<a href="#Footnote_58_58">[58]</a> of Thalaba,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While his skilled fingers modulate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The low, sweet, soothing, melancholy tones,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or if he strung the pearls<a href="#Footnote_59_59">[59]</a> of Poetry</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Singing with agitated face</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And eloquent arms, and sobs that reach the heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A tale<a href="#Footnote_60_60">[60]</a> of love and woe;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then, if the brightening Moon that lit his face</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In darkness favoured her’s,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Oh! even with such a look, as, fables say,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mother Ostrich<a href="#Footnote_61_61">[61]</a> fixes on her egg,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till that intense affection</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Kindle its light of life,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even in such deep and breathless tenderness</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Oneiza’s soul is centered on the youth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So motionless with such an ardent gaze,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Save when from her full eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quickly she wipes away the gushing tears</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That dim his image there.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She called him brother: was it sister-love</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That made the silver rings</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Round her smooth ankles<a href="#Footnote_62_62">[62]</a> and her twany arms,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shine daily brightened? for a brother’s eye</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were her long fingers<a href="#Footnote_63_63">[63]</a> tinged,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As when she trimmed the lamp,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thro’ the veins and delicate skin</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The light shone rosy? that the darkened lids<a href="#Footnote_64_64">[64]</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gave yet a softer lustre to her eye?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That with such pride she tricked</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her glossy tresses, and on holy day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wreathed the red flower-crown<a href="#Footnote_65_65">[65]</a> round their jetty waves?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How happily the years</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Thalaba went by!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Yet was the heart of Thalaba</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Impatient of repose;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Restless he pondered still</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The task for him decreed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mighty and mysterious work announced.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Day by day with youthful ardour</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He the call of Heaven awaits,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And oft in visions o’er the Murderer’s head</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He lifts the avenging arm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And oft in dreams he sees</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Sword that is circled with fire.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>One morn as was their wont, in sportive mood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The youth and damsel bent Hodeirah’s bow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For with no feeble hand nor erring aim</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Oneiza could let loose the obedient shaft.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With head back-bending, Thalaba</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shot up the aimless arrow high in air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose line in vain the aching sight pursued</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lost in the depth of heaven.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“When will the hour arrive,” exclaimed the youth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“That I shall aim these fated shafts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“To vengeance long delayed?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Have I not strength, my father, for the deed?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Or can the will of Providence</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Be mutable like man?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Shall I never be called to the task?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Impatient boy!” quoth Moath, with a smile:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Impatient Thalaba!” Oneiza cried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And she too smiled, but in her smile</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A mild reproachful melancholy mixed.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then Moath pointed where a cloud</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Locusts, from the desolated fields</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Syria, winged their way.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Lo! how created things</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Obey the written doom!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Onward they came, a dark continuous cloud</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of congregated myriads numberless,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rushing of whose wings was as the sound</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of a broad river, headlong in its course</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Plunged from a mountain summit, or the roar</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of a wild ocean in the autumn storm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shattering its billows on a shore of rocks.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Onward they came, the winds impelled them on,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their work was done, their path of<a href="#Footnote_66_66">[66]</a> ruin past,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their graves were ready in the wilderness.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Behold the mighty army!” Moath cried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Blindly they move, impelled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“By the blind Element.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“And yonder Birds our welcome visitants,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Lo! where they soar above the embodied host,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Pursue their way, and hang upon their rear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“And thin their spreading flanks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Rejoicing o’er their banquet! deemest thou</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“The scent of water, on the Syrian mosque</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Placed with priest-mummery, and the jargon-rites</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“That fool the multitude, has led them here</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“From far Khorasan?<a href="#Footnote_67_67">[67]</a> Allah who decreed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Yon tribe the plague and punishment of man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“These also hath he doomed to meet their way:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Both passive instruments</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Of his all-acting will,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Sole mover he, and only spring of all.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>While thus he spake, Oneiza’s eye looks up</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where one towards her flew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Satiate, for so it seemed, with sport and food.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Bird flew over her,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And as he past above,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From his relaxing grasp a Locust fell.⁠ ⁠…</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It fell upon the Maiden’s robe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And feebly there it stood, recovering slow.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The admiring girl surveyed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His out-spread sails of green.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His gauzy underwings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One closely to the grass green body furled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One ruffled in the fall, and half unclosed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She viewed his jet-orbed eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His glossy gorget bright</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Green-glittering in the sun;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His plumy pliant horns</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That, nearer as she gazed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bent tremblingly before her breath.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She viewed his yellow-circled front</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With lines mysterious veined;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“And knowest thou what is written here,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“My father?” said the Maid.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Look Thalaba! perchance these lines</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Are in the letters of the Ring,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Nature’s own language written here.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The youth bent down, and suddenly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He started, and his heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sprung, and his cheek grew red,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the mysterious<a href="#Footnote_68_68">[68]</a> lines were legible,</span>
				<br/>
				<span><b>When the sun shall be darkened at noon</b>,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<b>Son of Hodeirah, depart.</b>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Moath looked, and read the lines aloud;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Locust shook his wings and fled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And they were silent all.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Who then rejoiced but Thalaba?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who then was troubled but the Arabian Maid?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Moath sad of heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tho’ with a grief supprest, beheld the youth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sharpen his arrows now,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now new-plume their shafts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now to beguile impatient hope</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Feel every sharpened point.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Why is that anxious look,” Oneiza cried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Still upwards cast at noon?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Is Thalaba aweary of our tent?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I would be gone,” the youth replied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“That I might do my task,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“And full of glory to the tent return</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Whence I should part no more.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But on the noontide sun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As anxious and as oft Oneiza’s eye</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was upward glanced in fear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now as Thalaba replied, her cheek</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lost its fresh and lively hue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For in the Sun’s bright edge</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She saw, or thought she saw, a little speck.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sage Astronomer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who with the love of science full</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Trembled that day at every passing cloud,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He had not seen it, ’twas a speck so small.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Alas! Oneiza sees the spot increase!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lo! the ready Youth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Over his shoulder the full quiver slings</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And grasps the slackened bow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It spreads, and spreads, and now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Has shaddowed half the Sun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose crescent-pointed horns</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now momently decrease.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The day grows dark, the Birds retire to rest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forth from her shadowy haunt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flies the large-headed<a href="#Footnote_69_69">[69]</a> Screamer of the night.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far off the affrighted African,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deeming his God deceased,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Falls on his knees in prayer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And trembles as he sees</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fierce Hyena’s eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Glare in the darkness of that dreadful noon.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then Thalaba exclaimed, “Farewell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“My father! my Oneiza!” the Old Man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Felt his throat swell with grief.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Where wilt thou go my Child?” he cried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Wilt thou not wait a sign</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“To point thy destined way?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“God will conduct me!” said the noble youth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He said and from the Tent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the depth of the darkness departed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They heard his parting steps,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The quiver rattling as he past away.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
