<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Book XII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="book-12" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<h2>
				<span epub:type="label">Book</span>
				<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XII</span>
			</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Then Thalaba drew off Abdaldar’s ring,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And cast it in the sea, and cried aloud,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Thou art my shield, my trust, my hope, O God!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Behold and guard me now,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Thou who alone canst save.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“If from my childhood up, I have looked on</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“With exultation to my destiny,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“If, in the hour of anguish, I have felt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“The justice of the hand that chastened me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“If, of all selfish passions purified,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I go to work thy will, and from the world</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Root up the ill-doing race,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Lord! let not thou the weakness of my arm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Make vain the enterprize!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The Sun was rising all magnificent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ocean and Heaven rejoicing in his beams.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now had Thalaba</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Performed his last ablutions, and he stood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And gazed upon the little boat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Riding the billows near,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where, like a sea-bird breasting the broad waves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It rose and fell upon the surge;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till from the glitterance of the sunny main</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He turned his aching eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then upon the beach he laid him down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And watched the rising tide.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He did not pray, he was not calm for prayer;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His spirit troubled with tumultuous hope</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Toiled with futurity.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His brain, with busier workings, felt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The roar and raving of the restless sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The boundless waves that rose and rolled and rocked;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The everlasting sound</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Opprest him, and the heaving infinite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He closed his lids for rest.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Meantime with fuller reach and stronger swell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wave after wave advanced;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each following billow lifted the last foam</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That trembled on the sand with rainbow hues;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The living flower, that, rooted to the rock,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Late from the thinner element</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shrunk down within its purple stem to sleep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now feels the water, and again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Awakening blossoms out</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All its green anther-necks.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Was there a Spirit in the gale</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That fluttered o’er his cheek?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For it came on him like the gentle sun</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That plays and dallies o’er the night-closed flower,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And woos it to unfold anew to joy;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For it came on him as the dews of eve</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Descend with healing and with life</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the summer mead;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or liker the first sound of seraph song</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Angel hail, to him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose latest sense had shuddered at the groan</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of anguish, kneeling by his death bed-side.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He starts and gazes round to seek</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The certain presence. “Thalaba!” exclaimed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Voice of the Unseen;⁠ ⁠…</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Father of my Oneiza!” he replied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“And have thy years been numbered? art thou too</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Among the Angels?” “Thalaba!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A second and a dearer voice repeats,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Go in the favour of the Lord</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“My Thalaba go on!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“My husband. I have drest our bower of bliss.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Go and perform the work,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Let me not longer suffer hope in heaven!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He turned an eager glance towards the sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Come!” quoth the Damsel, and she drove</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her little boat to land.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Impatient thro’ the rising wave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He rushed to meet its way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His eye was bright, his cheek was flushed with joy.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Hast thou had comfort in thy prayers?” she cried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Yea,” answered Thalaba,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“A heavenly visitation.” “God be praised!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She uttered, “then I do not hope in vain!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And her voice trembled, and her lips</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quivered, and tears ran down.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Stranger,” quoth she, “in years long past</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Was one who vowed himself</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“The Champion of the Lord like thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Against the race of Hell.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Young was he, as thyself,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Gentle, and yet so brave!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“A lion-hearted man.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Shame on me, Stranger! in the arms of love</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I held him from his calling, till the hour</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Was past, and then the Angel who should else</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Have crowned him with his glory-wreath,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Smote him in anger⁠ ⁠… years and years are gone.⁠ ⁠…</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“And in his place of penance he awaits</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Thee the Deliverer, surely thou art he!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“It was my righteous punishment</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“In the same youth unchanged and changeless love,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“And fresh affliction and keen penitence</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“To abide the written hour when I should waft</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“The doomed Destroyer and Deliverer here.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Remember thou that thy success involves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“No single fate, no common misery.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>As thus she spake, the entrance of the cave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Darkened the boat below.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Around them from their nests,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The screaming sea-birds fled.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wondering at that strange shape</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet unalarmed at sight of living man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unknowing of his sway and power misused;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The clamours of their young</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Echoed in shriller yells</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That rung in wild discordance round the rock.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And farther as they now advanced</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The dim reflection of the darkened day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grew fainter, and the dash</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the out-breakers deadened; farther yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yet more faint the gleam,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And there the waters at their utmost bound</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Silently rippled on the rising rock.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They landed and advanced, and deeper in</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Two adamantine doors</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Closed up the cavern pass.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Reclining on the rock beside</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sate a grey-headed man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Watching an hour-glass by.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To him the Damsel spake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Is it the hour appointed?” the old man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor answered her awhile,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor lifted he his downward eye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For now the glass ran low,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And like the days of age</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With speed perceivable,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The latter sands descend:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now the last are gone.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then he looked up, and raised his arm, and smote</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The adamantine gates.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The gates of adamant</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unfolding at the stroke</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Opened and gave the entrance. Then She turned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Thalaba and said</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Go in the name of God!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I cannot enter,⁠ ⁠… I must wait the end</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“In hope and agony.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“God and Mohammed prosper thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“For thy sake and for ours!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He tarried not,⁠ ⁠… he past</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The threshold, over which was no return.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All earthly thoughts, all human hopes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And passions now put off,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He cast no backward glance</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Towards the gleam of day.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There was a light within,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A yellow light, as when the autumnal Sun</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through travelling rain and mist</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shines on the evening hills.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whether from central fires effused,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or if the sunbeams day by day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From earliest generations, there absorbed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were gathering for the wrath-flame. Shade was</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In those portentous vaults;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Crag overhanging, nor the column-rock</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cast its dark outline there.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For with the hot and heavy atmosphere</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The light incorporate, permeating all,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spread over all its equal yellowness.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There was no motion in the lifeless air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He felt no stirring as he past</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Adown the long descent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He heard not his own footsteps on the rock</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That thro’ the thick stagnation sent no sound.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How sweet it were, he thought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To feel the flowing wind!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With what a thirst of joy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He should breathe in the open gales of heaven!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Downward and downward still, and still the way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The long, long, way is safe.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is there no secret wile</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No lurking enemy?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His watchful eye is on the wall of rock,⁠ ⁠…</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And warily he marks the roof</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And warily surveyed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The path that lay before.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Downward and downward still, and still the way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The long, long, way is safe;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rock only, the same light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The same dead atmosphere,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And solitude, and silence like the grave.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>At length the long descent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ends on a precipice;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No feeble ray entered its dreadful gulphs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For in the pit profound</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Black Darkness, utter Night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Repelled the hostile gleam,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And o’er the surface the light atmosphere</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Floated and mingled not.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Above the depth four overawning wings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unplumed and huge and strong,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bore up a little car;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Four living pinions, headless, bodyless,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sprung from one stem that branched below</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In four down-arching limbs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And clenched the car-rings endlong and aside</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With claws of griffin grasp.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But not on these, the depths so terrible,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wonderous wings, fixed Thalaba his eye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For there upon the brink,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With fiery fetters fastened to the rock,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A man, a living man, tormented lay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The young Othatha; in the arms of love,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He who had lingered out the auspicious hour</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forgetful of his call.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In shuddering pity Thalaba exclaimed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Servant of God, can I not succour thee?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He groaned and answered, “Son of Man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I sinned and am tormented; I endure</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“In patience and in hope.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“The hour that shall destroy the Race of Hell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“That hour shall set me free.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Is it not come?” quoth Thalaba,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Yea! by this omen.” And with fearless hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He grasped the burning fetters, “in the name</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Of God!” and from the rock</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rooted the rivets, and adown the gulph</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hurled them. The rush of flames roared up,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For they had kindled in their fall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The deadly vapours of the pit profound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Thalaba bent on and looked below.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But vainly he explored</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The deep abyss of flame</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That sunk beyond the plunge of mortal eye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now all ablaze as if infernal fires</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Illumed the world beneath.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Soon was the poison-fuel spent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The flame grew pale and dim,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And dimmer now it fades and now is quenched,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all again is dark,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Save where the yellow air</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Enters a little in and mingles slow.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Meantime the freed Othatha clasped his knees</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And cried, “Deliverer!” struggling then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With joyful hope, “and where is she,” he cried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Whose promised coming for so many a year.⁠ ⁠…”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Go!” answered Thalaba,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“She waits thee at the gates.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“And in thy triumph,” he replied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“There thou wilt join us?” the Deliverer’s eye</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Glanced on the abyss, way else was none.⁠ ⁠…</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The depth was unascendable.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Await not me,” he cried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“My path hath been appointed, go⁠ ⁠… embark!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Return to life,⁠ ⁠… live happy!”</span>
			</p>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Othatha</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But thy name,⁠ ⁠…</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That thro’ the nations we may blazon it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That we may bless thee.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Thalaba</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Bless the Merciful!</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<p>
				<span>Then Thalaba pronounced the name of God</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And leapt into the car.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Down, down, it sunk,⁠ ⁠… down down.⁠ ⁠…</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He neither breathes nor sees;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His eyes are closed for giddiness</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His breath is sinking with the fall.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The air that yields beneath the car</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Inflates the wings above.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Down⁠ ⁠… down⁠ ⁠… a mighty depth!⁠ ⁠…</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And was the Simorgh with the Powers of ill</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Associate to destroy?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And was that lovely mariner</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A fiend as false as fair?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For still he sinks down⁠ ⁠… down.⁠ ⁠…</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But ever the uprushing wind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Inflates the wings above,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And still the struggling wings</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Repel the rushing wind.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Down⁠ ⁠… down⁠ ⁠… and now it strikes.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He stands and totters giddily,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All objects round, awhile,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Float dizzy on his sight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Collected soon he gazes for the way.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There was a distant light that led his search;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The torch a broader blaze,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The unpruned taper flames a longer flame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But this was fierce as is the noon-tide sun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So in the glory of its rays intense</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It quivered with green glow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beyond was all unseen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No eye could penetrate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That unendurable excess of light.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It veiled no friendly form, thought Thalaba,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wisely did he deem,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For at the threshold of the rocky door,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hugest and fiercest of his kind accurst,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fit warden of the sorcery gate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A rebel Afreet lay.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He scented the approach of human food</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hungry hope kindled his eye of flame.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Raising his hand to save the dazzled sense</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Onward held Thalaba,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lifted still at times a rapid glance.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till, the due distance gained,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With head abased, he laid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The arrow in its rest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With steady effort and knit forehead then,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full on the painful light</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He fixed his aching eye, and loosed the bow.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>An anguish yell ensued,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sure no human voice had scope or power</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For that prodigious shriek</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose pealing echoes thundered up the rock.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dim grew the dying light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But Thalaba leapt onward to the doors</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now visible beyond,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And while the Afreet warden of the way</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was writhing with his death-pangs, over him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sprung and smote the stony doors,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bade them in the name of God give way.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The dying Fiend beneath him at that name</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tossed in worse agony,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the rocks shuddered, and the rocky doors</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rent at the voice asunder. Lo⁠ ⁠… within.⁠ ⁠…</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Teraph and the fire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Khawla, and in mail complete</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mohareb for the strife.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But Thalaba with numbing force</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Smites his raised arm, and rushes by,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For now he sees the fire amid whose flames</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the white ashes of Hodeirah lies</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hodeirah’s holy Sword.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He rushes to the fire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then Khawla met the youth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And leapt upon him, and with clinging arms</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Clasps him, and calls Mohareb now to aim</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The effectual vengeance. O fool! fool! he sees</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His Father’s Sword, and who shall bar his way?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who stand against the fury of that arm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That spurns her to the earth?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She rises half, she twists around his knees,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A moment⁠ ⁠… and he vainly strives</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To shake her from her hold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Impatient then into her cursed breast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He stamps his crushing heel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And from her body, heaving now in death</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Springs forward to the Sword.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The co-existent flame</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Knew the Destroyer; it encircled him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rolled up his robe and gathered round his head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Condensing to intenser splendour there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His crown of glory and his light of life</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hovered the irradiate wreath.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The moment Thalaba had laid his hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon his Father’s Sword,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Living Image in the inner cave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Smote the Round Altar. The Domdaniel rocked</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thro’ all its thundering vaults;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Over the surface of the reeling Earth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The alarum shock was felt:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Sorcerer brood, all, all, where’er dispersed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Perforce obeyed the summons; all, they came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Compelled by Hell and Heaven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By Hell compelled to keep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their baptism-covenant,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with the union of their strength</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Oppose the common danger; forced by Heaven</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To share the common doom.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Vain are all spells! the Destroyer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Treads the Domdaniel floor.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They crowd with human arms and human force</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To crush the single foe;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Vain is all human force!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He wields his Father’s Sword,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The vengeance of awakened Deity!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But chief on Thalaba Mohareb prest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The language of the inspired Witch</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Announced one fatal blow for both,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And desperate of self-safety, yet he hoped</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To serve the cause of Eblis, and uphold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His empire true in death.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Who shall withstand his way?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Scattered before the sword of Thalaba</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sorcerer throng recede</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And leave him space for combat. Wretched man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What shall the helmet or the shield avail</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against Almighty anger! wretched man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Too late Mohareb finds that he has chosen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The evil part! he rears his shield</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To meet the Arabian’s sword,⁠ ⁠…</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Under the edge of that fire-hardened steel</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The shield falls severed; his cold arm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rings with the jarring blow,⁠ ⁠…</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He lifts his scymetar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A second stroke, and lo! the broken hilt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hangs from his palsied hand!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now he bleeds! and now he flies!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And fain would hide himself amid the throng,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But they feel the sword of Hodeirah,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But they also fly from the ruin!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hasten to the inner cave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And fall all fearfully</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Around the Giant Idol’s feet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seeking salvation from the Power they served.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>It was a Living Image, by the art</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of magic hands of flesh and bones composed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And human blood thro’ veins and arteries</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That flowed with vital action. In the shape</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Eblis it was made,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its stature such and such its strength</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As when among the Sons of God</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pre-eminent, he raised his radiant head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Prince of the Morning. On his brow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A coronet of meteor flames,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flowing in points of light.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Self-poised in air before him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hung the Round Altar, rolling like the World</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On its diurnal axis, like the World</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Checquered with sea and shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The work of Demon art.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For where the sceptre in the Idol’s hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Touched the Round Altar, in its answering realm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Earth felt the stroke, and Ocean rose in storms,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And ruining Cities shaken from their seat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Crushed all their habitants.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His other arm was raised, and its spread palm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Up-bore the ocean-weight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose naked waters arched the sanctuary,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sole prop and pillar he.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Fallen on the ground around his feet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Sorcerers lay. Mohareb’s quivering arms</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Clung to the Idol’s knees;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Idol’s face was pale</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And calm in terror he beheld</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The approach of the Destroyer.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Sure of his stroke, and therefore in pursuit</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Following, nor blind, nor hasty on his foe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Moved the Destroyer. Okba met his way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of all that brotherhood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He only fearless, miserable man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The one that had no hope.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“On me, on me,” the childless Sorcerer cried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Let fall the weapon! I am he who stole</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Upon the midnight of thy Father’s tent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“This is the hand that pierced Hodeirah’s heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“That felt thy brethren’s and thy sister’s blood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Gush round the dagger-hilt. Let fall on me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“The fated sword! the vengeance hour is come!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Destroyer, do thy work!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Nor wile, nor weapon, had the desperate wretch,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He spread his bosom to the stroke.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Old man, I strike thee not!” said Thalaba,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“The evil thou hast done to me and mine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Brought its own bitter punishment.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“For thy dear Daughter’s sake I pardon thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“As I do hope Heaven’s pardon. For her sake</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Repent while time is yet! thou hast my prayers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“To aid thee; thou poor sinner, cast thyself</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Upon the goodness of offended God!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I speak in Laila’s name, and what if now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Thou canst not think to join in Paradise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Her spotless Spirit,⁠ ⁠… hath not Allah made</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Al-Araf<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-176" id="noteref-176" epub:type="noteref">176</a> in his wisdom? where the sight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Of Heaven shall kindle in the penitent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“The strong and purifying fire of hope,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Till at the day of judgement he shall see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“The Mercy-Gates unfold.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The astonished man stood gazing as he spake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At length his heart was softened, and the tears</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gushed, and he sobbed aloud.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then suddenly was heard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The all-beholding Prophet’s aweful voice,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Thou hast done well, my Servant!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Ask and receive thy reward!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>A deep and aweful joy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seemed to distend the heart of Thalaba;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With arms in reverence crost upon his breast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upseeking eyes suffused with transport-tears</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He answered to the Voice, “Prophet of God,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Holy, and good, and bountiful!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“One only earthly wish have I, to work</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Thy will, and thy protection grants me that.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Look on this Sorcerer! heavy are his crimes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“But infinite is mercy! if thy servant</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Have now found favour in the sight of God,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Let him be touched with penitence, and save</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“His soul from utter death.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“The groans of penitence,” replied the Voice</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Never arise unheard!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“But for thyself prefer the prayer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“The Treasure-house of Heaven</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Is open to thy will.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Prophet of God!” then answered Thalaba,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I am alone on earth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Thou knowest the secret wishes of my heart!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Do with me as thou wilt! thy will is best.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>There issued forth no Voice to answer him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But lo! Hodeirah’s Spirit comes to see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His vengeance, and beside him, a pure form</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of roseate light, the Angel mother hangs.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“My Child, my dear, my glorious, blessed Child,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“My promise is performed⁠ ⁠… fufil thy work!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thalaba knew that his death-hour was come,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And on he leapt, and springing up,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into the Idol’s heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hilt-deep he drove the Sword.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Ocean-Vault fell in, and all were crushed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the same moment at the gate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Paradise, Oneiza’s Houri-form</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Welcomed her Husband to eternal bliss.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
